                                               ON FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE, SELF-SIMILAR
                                                    MEASURES, AND THE Lq NORMS OF CONVOLUTIONS




arXiv:1609.07802v3 [math.DS] 21 Nov 2018
                                                                                   PABLO SHMERKIN

                                                   A BSTRACT. We study a class of measures on the real line with a kind of self-similar
                                                   structure, which we call dynamically driven self-similar measures, and contain proper
                                                   self-similar measures such as Bernoulli convolutions as special cases. Our main result
                                                   gives an expression for the Lq dimensions of such dynamically driven self-similar
                                                   measures, under certain conditions. As an application, we settle Furstenberg’s long-
                                                   standing conjecture on the dimension of the intersections of ×p and ×q-invariant sets.
                                                   Among several other applications, we also show that Bernoulli convolutions have an
                                                   Lq density for all finite q, outside of a zero-dimensional set of exceptions.
                                                      The proof of the main result is inspired by M. Hochman’s approach to the dimen-
                                                   sions of self-similar measures and his inverse theorem for entropy. Our method can
                                                   be seen as an extension of Hochman’s theory from entropy to Lq norms, and likewise
                                                   relies on an inverse theorem for the decay of Lq norms of discrete measures under
                                                   convolution. This central piece of our approach may be of independent interest, and
                                                   is an application of well-known methods and results in additive combinatorics: the
                                                   asymmetric version of the Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers Theorem due to Tao-Vu, and
                                                   some constructions of Bourgain.




                                                                                       C ONTENTS
                                             1. Introduction and main results                                                                 2
                                             1.1. Transversality of ×p, ×q                                                                    2
                                             1.2. Dimension and densities of Bernoulli convolutions                                           5
                                             1.3. Lq dimensions, Frostman exponents, and the size of fibers                                   7
                                             1.4. A class of dynamically-driven self-similar measures                                         9
                                             1.5. Lq dimensions of dynamically driven self-similar measures                                  11
                                             1.6. Outline of proof                                                                           12
                                             1.7. Organization of the paper and summary of applications                                      15
                                             1.8. Notation                                                                                   16
                                             2. An inverse theorem for the decay of Lq norms under convolution                               17
                                             3. Proof of the inverse theorem                                                                 21
                                             3.1. Preliminaries                                                                              21
                                             2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary: 11K55, 28A80, 37C45, Secondary: 28A78, 28D05,
                                           37A45.
                                             Key words and phrases. ×p-invariant sets, dynamical rigidity, self-similar measures, Bernoulli con-
                                           volutions, intersections of Cantor sets.
                                             P.S. was partially supported by Projects PICT 2013-1393 and PICT 2014-1480 (ANPCyT) .
                                                                                             1
2                                   PABLO SHMERKIN

    3.2. Overview                                                                23
    3.3. Analytical lemmas                                                       23
    3.4. Combinatorial lemmas                                                    25
    3.5. Proof of Theorem 2.1                                                    28
    4. Properties of dynamically driven self-similar measures                    31
    4.1. Preliminary lemmas                                                      31
    4.2. A sub-multiplicative cocycle, and consequences                          32
    4.3. Multifractal structure                                                  34
    5. Proof of Theorem 1.11                                                     38
    5.1. Flattening of Lq norm for dynamically driven self-similar measures      38
           q
    5.2. L norms of µx,n at finer scales                                         42
    5.3. Proof of Theorem 1.11                                                   44
         q
    6. L dimensions of self-similar measures, and applications                   45
    6.1. Background on self-similar sets and measures                            45
           q
    6.2. L dimensions and Frostman exponents of self-similar measures            46
    6.3. Some applications                                                       48
    6.4. General self-similar measures on the line                               50
    7. Convolutions of self-similar measures and the proof of Theorem 1.2        54
    7.1. Convolutions of two self-similar measures and Furstenberg’s conjectures 54
    7.2. Convolutions of several self-similar measures                           58
    7.3. Embeddings of self-similar sets                                         59
    8. Sections and projections of planar self-similar sets                      60
                                  q
    9. Absolute continuity and L densities                                       62
    References                                                                   65



                       1. I NTRODUCTION AND MAIN RESULTS
1.1. Transversality of ×p, ×q. In the 1960s, H. Furstenberg proposed a series of con-
jectures which, in different ways, aim to capture the heuristic principle that “ex-
pansions in multiplicatively independent bases (such as 2 and 3) should have no
common structure”. Recall that p, q ∈ N are called multiplicatively independent if
they are not powers of a common integer or, equivalently, log p/ log q is irrational.
For p ∈ N≥2 , let Tp : [0, 1) → [0, 1), x 7→ px mod 1 denote multiplication by p on the
circle. In [19], Furstenberg proved a pioneering result of this type: if p, q ∈ N≥2 are
multiplicatively independent, then no infinite proper closed subset of [0, 1] can be
simultaneously invariant under Tp and Tq . This gave rise to the famous ×2, ×3 con-
jecture, which remains open today: if µ is a Borel probability measure on the circle
invariant under T2 and T3 , then µ is a linear combination of Lebesgue measure and
a purely atomic measure.
   Furstenberg proposed other conjectures with a more geometric flavor. Let A, B be
closed subsets of the circle [0, 1) invariant under Tp , Tq respectively, with p, q again
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                  3

multiplicatively independent. Furstenberg conjectured that
                      dimH (A + B) = min(dimH (A) + dimH (B), 1),
where dimH stands for Hausdorff dimension, and A + B = {a + b : a ∈ A, b ∈ B}
is the arithmetic sum. This fits into the general heuristic principle mentioned above,
since the inequality dimH (A + B) ≤ min(dimH (A) + dimH (B), 1) always holds, and a
strict inequality should only occur if A and B have some shared structure at many
scales. This conjecture was proved in [38] in the special case that A, B are defined by
restricting the digits in their base p, q expansion to a fixed digit set, and in [28] in the
general case. Moreover, in [28] a corresponding result for invariant measures was
obtained: if µ, ν are Borel probability measures invariant under ×p, ×q respectively,
then
(1.1)                  dimH (µ ∗ ν) = min(dimH (µ) + dimH (ν), 1).
Here dimH denotes the lower Hausdorff dimension of a measure, defined as
                          dimH (η) = inf{dimH (A) : η(A) > 0}.
   We note that this result is trivial if either µ or ν have zero entropy (since zero
entropy implies zero dimension), but in the positive entropy case it is stronger than
the ×2, ×3 conjecture. We recall the Rudolph-Johnson theorem, asserting that if µ, ν
are ergodic and invariant under ×p, ×q (with log p/ log q irrational) and µ has positive
but not full entropy with respect to ×p, then µ and ν are singular. We showed in [28]
that the Rudolph-Johnson Theorem can be obtained as an easy corollary of (1.1).
   There is an obvious heuristic relationship between the size of the sumset A + B
and the size of the fibers ℓz = {(x, y) : x ∈ A, y ∈ B, x + y = z}. Namely, if the sumset
is “large” then “many fibers” should be small, and conversely. Another conjecture
of Furstenberg, and one of the few to be stated explicitly in print [20, Conjecture 1],
asserts that for sets invariant under ×2, ×3, all fibers should be small:
Conjecture 1.1. If A, B are closed subsets of the circle [0, 1), invariant under Tp , Tq
respectively, with p and q multiplicatively independent, then
(1.2)               dimH (A ∩ B) ≤ max(dimH (A) + dimH (B) − 1, 0).
   In Furstenberg’s terminology, the dynamics of Tp and Tq should be transverse.
Again, this fits into the general heuristics of “lack of common structure” since a fiber
of larger than expected size can be seen as some shared structure between A and B
(and hence between expansions in bases p and q). To see why the right-hand side
in (1.2) is the natural bound, one can think of the analogous formula for the dimen-
sion of the intersection of transversal linear subspaces, or Marstrand’s intersection
theorem asserting that for any Borel set E ⊂ R2 ,
                          dimH (E ∩ ℓ) ≤ max(dimH (E) − 1, 0)
4                                    PABLO SHMERKIN

for almost all lines ℓ, and this fails for any smaller value on the right-hand side (we
note that E = A×B has dimension dimH (A)+dimH (B)). See for example [34, Chapter
10].
  Also in [20], Furstenberg showed that if
                                  dimH (A ∩ g(B)) ≥ c
for some invertible affine map g : R → R, then for almost all slopes a there is an
affine map ga (x) = ax + b(a) such that
                                  dimH (A ∩ ga (B)) ≥ c.
Using this, it is not hard to show that Conjecture 1.1 holds when dimH (A)+dimH (B) ≤
1/2; see [25, Theorem 7.9] for an exposition of the argument. More generally, com-
bining Furstenberg’s result with estimates of Wolff [51] on the dimension of sets that
contain, for almost every v ∈ S 1 , a subset of a line in direction v with Hausdorff
dimension at least c, one gets
                dimH (A ∩ g(B)) ≤ max(dimH (A) + dimH (B) − 1/2, 0).
Note that this is vacuous if dimH (A) ≥ 1/2.
   We say that A ⊂ [0, 1) is a p-Cantor set if it is the set of points whose base p-
expansion digits lie in some proper set D ⊂ {0, 1, . . . , p − 1} with at least 2 elements.
In a different direction, in [17] it was shown that if A and B are a p-Cantor set and a q-
Cantor set respectively, then A cannot be affinely embedded into B if 0 < dimH (A) <
dimH (B) < 1. More precisely, it follows from [17, Theorem 1.6] that in this case there
is some (non-effective) δ = δ(A, B) > 0 such that
                            dimH (A ∩ g(B)) ≤ dimH (A) − δ
for all C 1 diffeomorphisms g of R (here, and whenever clear from context, we think
of A, B as subsets of [0, 1) ⊂ R rather than the circle). One can deduce the same
result for general invariant sets by a standard upper approximation. De-Jun Feng
(Private Communication) developed an algorithm that yields effective values of δ
in specific cases, for example if A is the middle-one quarter Cantor set and B is the
middle-thirds Cantor set; the computed values are still far from those predicted by
Furstenberg’s conjecture.
  D-J. Feng (Private Communication) also constructed, for any multiplicatively in-
dependent p, q and for any 0 < s, t < 1 and ε > 0, closed Tp , Tq -invariant sets
A, B ⊂ [0, 1) of dimension s, t respectively, for which
                dimH (A ∩ g(B)) ≤ max(dimH (A) + dimH (B) − 1, 0) + ε,
for all affine maps g. Although this comes close, we note that not a single example of
sets A, B (for some multiplicatively independent p, q) for which the conjecture holds,
was known, apart from the trivial cases in which one of the sets has dimension 0 or
1, and the case in which dimH (A) + dimH (B) ≤ 1/2, as explained above.
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                       5

   In this article, we prove the following strong version of Furstenberg’s conjecture
which, in his terminology, says that the maps Tp and Tq on the circle are strongly
transverse:
Theorem 1.2. Let p, q ∈ N≥2 be multiplicatively independent. Then for any closed sets
A, B of the circle [0, 1) invariant under Tp , Tq respectively, and for any invertible affine map
g : R → R,
                    dimB (A ∩ g(B)) ≤ max(dimH (A) + dimH (B) − 1, 0).
   Here dimB denotes upper box-counting dimension, which is always at least as
large as Hausdorff dimension.
   The method we use to establish Theorem 1.2 yields several other new results on
classical problems in fractal geometry and dynamics. Before discussing our general
approach, we present some of these results.

1.2. Dimension and densities of Bernoulli
                                       P∞        convolutions. Given λ ∈ (0, 1), let νλ be
the distribution of the random series n=0 ±λn , with the signs chosen independently
with equal probabilities. This is the family of Bernoulli convolutions, whose study
goes back to the 1930s. For λ ∈ (0, 1/2), it is well known that νλ is (up to an affine
bijection) a constant multiple of Hausdorff measure (of the appropriate dimension)
on the central Cantor set constructed by removing a central interval of length 1 − 2λ
from [0, 1] and iterating. The properties of νλ for λ ∈ [1/2, 1) have been studied for
some 80 years but are far from being properly understood. We prove new properties
of the densities and dimension of νλ outside of a small set of parameters.
   Perhaps the most significant open problem on Bernoulli convolutions is to deter-
mine for which values of λ the measure νλ turns out to be absolutely continuous.
Erdős already in 1939 [10] showed that if λ−1 is a Pisot number (an algebraic unit > 1
such that all its algebraic conjugates are < 1 in modulus), then νλ is singular. It is still
not known if there is any λ ∈ (1/2, 1) such that νλ is singular and λ−1 is not Pisot.
   In light of this open problem, a fruitful strand of research developed to prove re-
sults of the form: νλ is absolutely continuous, with certain regularity of the density,
outside of some “small” set. This line was also initiated by Erdős [11], who proved
that for every k ∈ N there is εk > 0 such that νλ has a k-times continuously differen-
tiable density for almost all λ ∈ (1 − εk , 1). Several decades later, Kahane [30] noted
that Erdős’ argument yields a stronger statement, namely, that for every k ∈ N,
             lim dimH {λ ∈ (1 − ε, 1) : νλ does not have a C k density } = 0.
              ε↓0

The proof of Erdős-Kahane is based on a combinatorial study of the Fourier trans-
form of νλ , and no other proof of the statement is known.
   The Erdős-Kahane argument only gives non-trivial information very close to 1. In
a landmark paper from 1995, Solomyak [48] showed that νλ is absolutely continuous
with an L2 density for almost all λ ∈ (1/2, 1). A simpler proof was obtained by Peres
and Solomyak [39]. The L2 part of the result is a by-product of the transversality
6                                     PABLO SHMERKIN

technique used by Solomyak, and a natural question is whether L2 can be replaced
by a better space. In [36], Peres and Schlag proved that for any ε > 0 there is some
(explicit) δ > 0 such hat νλ has fractional derivatives of order δ in L2 , for almost all
λ ∈ (1/2 + ε, 1). By the Sobolev embedding theorem, in particular this implies that
νλ has a density in Lq for some q = q(ε) > 2 for almost all λ ∈ (1/2 + ε, 1). Their
result still relies on transversality techniques, which cannot go beyond L2 for λ close
to 1/2.
   Besides improving on the smoothness of the density, another natural line to pursue
is to make the exceptional set of λ smaller. In the same article [36], Peres and Schlag
proved that for every ε > 0, there is an explicit δ > 0 such that
           dimH {λ ∈ (1/2 + ε, 1) : νλ does not have an L2 density } ≤ 1 − δ.
  Much more recently, the author [43] (relying on deep work of Hochman [26] that
will be discussed in some detail below) proved that νλ is absolutely continuous for all
λ outside of a set of zero Hausdorff dimension. Moreover, in [46] it was shown that,
again outside of a set of zero Hausdorff dimension of parameters, νλ has a density in
Lq for some q > 1 that is not explicit and depends on λ.
  These three lines of work yield somewhat complementary results: the stronger the
information about the densities, the weaker the information about the exceptional
set. They also leave open the question of what is the smallest natural function space
that contains the density of νλ for almost all λ. In this article, we prove:
Theorem 1.3.        (i). There exists a set E ⊂ (1/2, 1) of zero Hausdorff dimension such that
        if λ ∈ (1/2, 1) \ E, then νλ has
                                       √  a density in Lq for all finite q > 1.
                              ′
            √ exists a′ set E ⊂ (1/ 2, 1) of zero Hausdorff dimension such that if λ ∈
  (ii). There
        (1/ 2, 1) \ E , then νλ has a continuous density.
  The new contribution is part (i); part (ii) then follows by a standard argument. In
turn, part (i) follows from a new result about dimensions of Bernoulli convolutions,
together with a result from [46]. To state the dimensional result, we define the fol-
lowing set (which appears already in [26]).
Definition 1.4. Let Pn be the family of all non-zero polynomials of degree at most n
and coefficients in {−1, 0, 1}. Let
                                                             
                                      1
                   E = λ ∈ (1/2, 1) : log min |P (λ)| → −∞ .
                                      n       P ∈Pn

  It is shown in [26] that E has zero packing dimension (in particular, zero Haus-
dorff dimension) and does not contain any algebraic number which is not a root of a
polynomial in Pn for some n. In particular, no rational number in (1/2, 1) is in E.
Theorem 1.5. Let λ ∈ (1/2, 1) \ E. Then for every ε > 0 there is C = C(ε, λ) > 0 such
that
                   νλ (B(x, r)) ≤ C r 1−ε for all x ∈ R, r ∈ (0, 1].
         FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                7

  It is known (see [16]) that for any λ, the limit
                                       log νλ (B(x, r))
                                   lim
                                   r↓0       log r
exists and is constant νλ -almost everywhere; this constant value is denoted dim(νλ )
and equals the Hausdorff, packing and entropy dimensions of νλ . In [26], it is proved
that if λ ∈ (1/2, 1)\E, then dim(νλ ) = 1. Theorem 1.5 strengthens this, since it implies
in particular that
                                        log νλ (B(x, r))
                                lim inf                  ≥1
                                  r↓0         log r
for all (rather than almost all) x. On the other hand, for any locally finite measure µ
on the real line it holds that
                                         log µ(B(x, r))
                                lim sup                  ≤1
                                   r↓0         log r
for µ almost all x. Nevertheless, for any λ ∈ (1/2, 1) there are two points x (the
boundary points of the support of νλ ) for which
                              log νλ (B(x, r))     log 2
                          lim                  =          > 1,
                          r↓0       log r        log(1/λ)
and if λ is close to 1/2 there is a positive dimensional set of such points, see [29,
Theorem 1.5]. These remarks indicate that Theorem 1.5 is optimal in a number of
ways.
   We obtain similar results for more general self-similar measures, including biased
Bernoulli convolutions. We compute the Lq dimension of arbitrary self-similar mea-
sures on the real line under Hochman’s exponential separation assumption: see The-
orems 6.2 and 6.6. We also establish absolute continuity with Lq density for general
parametrized families of homogeneous self-similar measures, outside of a codimen-
sion 1 set of possible exceptions in the super-critical region. See Theorem 9.2 for
details.
   Very recently, some striking progress on the dimensions and absolute continuity of
Bernoulli convolutions for algebraic parameters was achieved by P. Varjú [50] and E.
Breuillard and P. Varjú [7]. The latter article also uncovers some deep connections be-
tween Bernoulli convolutions, the famous Lehmer’s conjecture from number theory,
and the growth of subgroups of linear groups. This line of work goes in a transver-
sal direction to ours: while they obtain new information for many algebraic (and not
only) parameters, which our work is far from being able to replicate, their methods
do not seem to be able to give information about Frostman exponents or Lq densities
for any q > 1.
1.3. Lq dimensions, Frostman exponents, and the size of fibers. At first sight, The-
orems 1.2 and 1.5 may appear to have little in common. However, we will obtain
both as rather direct consequences of a single general result. Our common approach
8                                    PABLO SHMERKIN

is based on Lq dimensions. Let µ be a Borel probability measure on [0, 1]. We denote
the family of 2−m -intervals {[j2−m , (j + 1)2−m )}, j ∈ Z by Dm . If q > 1, then
                                   P
                                log I∈Dm µ(I)q
                                                  ∈ [0, 1],
                                   (1 − q)m
for any m ∈ N, as can be easily seen from Hölder’s inequality. Here and throughout
the article, the logarithms are to base 2. Moreover, a small value indicates that µ
is nearly concentrated on few intervals in Dm , while a value close to 1 implies that
µ(I), I ∈ Dm is a fairly uniform probability vector. Thus, it makes sense to consider
the limit as m → ∞ of the left-hand side as a notion of dimension of µ.
Definition 1.6. Let q ∈ (1, ∞). If µ is a probability measure on R with bounded sup-
port, then                                              P
                                                     log I∈Dm µ(I)q
                       τ (µ, q) = τµ (q) = lim inf −
                                            m→∞           m
        q
is the L spectrum of µ, and
                                                       τµ (q)
                                D(µ, q) = Dµ (q) =
                                                       q−1
is the Lq dimension of µ.
   It is also possible to define Lq dimensions for other values of q, but we will not
need to do so here. It is well-known that, for a fixed measure µ, the map q 7→ D(µ, q)
is continuous and decreasing on (1, ∞). Moreover,
                                  dimH µ ≥ lim D(µ, q).
                                              q↓1

See [14] for proofs of these standard facts.
   If µ is a finite measure on a metric space X, we say that µ has Frostman exponent
s if µ(B(x, r)) ≤ C r s for some C > 0 and all x ∈ X, r > 0. It is easy to see that Lq
dimensions for large q provide information about Frostman exponents:
Lemma 1.7. Let µ be a probability measure on a compact interval of R. If D(µ, q) > s for
some q ∈ (1, ∞), then there is r0 > 0 such that
                     µ(B(x, r)) ≤ r (1−1/q)s for all x ∈ R, r ∈ (0, r0 ].
Proof. If D(µ, q) > s, then there is s′ > s such that for all large enough m and each
J ∈ Dm ,                              X                    ′
                            µ(J)q ≤       µ(I)q ≤ 2−m(q−1)s .
                                      I∈Dm
Since any ball can be covered by O(1) dyadic intervals of size smaller than the radius,
we get that if r is sufficiently small then
                                                           ′
                                µ(B(x, r)) ≤ C r (1−1/q)s ,
where C is independent of x and r. This gives the claim.                              
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                      9

  Hence, in order to establish Theorem 1.5 it is enough to show that, under the hy-
potheses of the theorem, D(νλ , q) = 1 for arbitrarily large q; and this is what we will
do.
  Next, we show how Frostman exponents (and therefore, also Lq dimensions) of
projected measures give information about the size of fibers. We recall the definition
of upper box-counting (or Minkowski) dimension in a totally bounded metric space
(X, d). Given A ⊂ X, let Nε (A) denote the maximal cardinality of an ε-separated
subset of A. The upper box-counting dimension of A is then defined as
                                                    log(Nε (A))
                              dimB (A) = lim sup                .
                                              ε↓0     log(1/ε)
Lemma 1.8. Let X be a compact metric space, and suppose π : X → R is a Lipschitz
map. Let µ be a probability measure on X such that µ(B(x, r)) ≥ r s for all x ∈ X and
all sufficiently small r (independent of x). If πµ has Frostman exponent α, then there exists
C > 0 such that for all balls Bε of radius ε in R, any ε-separated subset of π −1 (Bε ) has size
at most Cε−(s−α) .
   In particular, for any y ∈ R,
                                   dimB (π −1 (y)) ≤ s − α
Proof. Let (xj )M                                −1
                j=1 be an ε-separated subset of π (Bε ) with ε small. Then

                                 M
                                               !
                                 [
                              µ     B(xj , ε/2) ≥ M(ε/2)s ,
                                  j=1

while the set in question projects onto an interval of size at most O(ε). Hence M =
O(εα−s ), giving the claim.                                                       

1.4. A class of dynamically-driven self-similar measures. It is easy to see that in
order to prove Theorem 1.2, it is enough to consider the case in which A is a p-
Cantor set and B is a q-Cantor set, that is, A is the set of points whose base p-
expansion digits lie in some set D1 ⊂ {0,          P 1, . . . , p − 1}, and likewise for B and a
                                                1
set D2 ⊂ {0, 1, . . . , q − 1}. Let ∆i = |Di| d∈Di δd , and let η1 , η2 be the distributions
                          P                P∞
of the random sums ∞        i=1 X i p −i
                                         ,          −i
                                            i=1 Yi q , respectively, where Xi are i.i.d. random
variables with distribution ∆1 , and Yi are i.i.d. random variables, also independent
of the Xi , with distribution ∆2 . Finally, set µ = η1 × η2 .
   It is easy to see that µ(B(x, r)) = Θ(r dimH A+dimH B ) for x ∈ supp(µ) = A × B. Our
goal is to apply Lemma 1.8 to µ and, in light of Lemma 1.7, we will do this by inves-
tigating the Lq dimension of projections of µ. Up to a smooth change of coordinates
in the parametrization, and an affine change of coordinates in the projections, the
family of linear projections of µ in directions with strictly positive slope is given by
                                 {µx := η1 ∗ Sex η2 : x ∈ R},
10                                       PABLO SHMERKIN

where Sa (x) = ax scales by a. Note that µx is an infinite convolution of Bernoulli
random variables, since η1 , η2 are. Unlike η1 , η2 , the measures µx are not self-similar
because η1 , η2 are constructed with different contraction ratios. However, it is still
possible to express µx in a way that resembles self-similarity, but with the geometry
at different scales driven by a dynamical system. Namely, suppose p < q and let
X = [0, log q), T : X → X, x 7→ x + log p mod (log q). Moreover, for each x ∈ X, let
∆(x) be the finitely supported measure given by
                                
                                   ∆1 ∗ Sex ∆2 if x ∈ [0, log p)
                       ∆(x) =                                          .
                                   ∆1            if x ∈ [log p, log q)
                                                                         P
It is then easy to see that µx is the distribution of the random sum ∞            −i
                                                                          i=1 Zi p , where
                                                         i
the Zi are independent and have distribution ∆(T x). Indeed, let
                     n′ (x) = |{j ∈ {1, . . . , n} : Tj (x) ∈ [0, log p)}|.
Note that
                              Tn (x) = x + n log p − n′ (x) log q,
so that
                                         n                       ′
                               eT (x) p−n = ex q −n (x) .
                              Pn
Hence the distribution µx,n of i=1 Zi p−i is equal to the distribution of
                                  n                 n′ (x)
                                  X                 X
                                         Xi p−i +            ex Yi q −i ,
                                   i=1              i=1

where Xi , Yi are independent and have distribution ∆1 , ∆2 respectively. This shows
that µx,n → µx weakly.
   Although in different language, this decomposition of µx can be traced back to
Furstenberg [20], and was also used more explicitly in [35] to study the L2 dimen-
sions of µx .
   Based on the above discussion, we introduce the following setup. Let A be the
collection of all probability measures supported on a finite set, i.e.
                      (N                                                )
                        X                               X
                  A=         pi δ(ti ) : N ∈ N, pi > 0,   pi = 1, ti ∈ R .
                        i=1                                          i

(We denote a delta mass at t either by δt or δ(t).) We topologize A in the natural way:
it consists of countably many connected components, corresponding to the number
of atoms N, and for each N it inherits the topology from R2N .
   If µ is a measure on a metric space X and f : X → Y is a Borel map, then we
denote by f µ the push-forward measure: f µ(A) = µ(f −1 A)). Fix λ ∈ (0, 1). If ∆i is
a sequence of measures in A, all supported on a fixed compact interval, then we can
form the infinite Bernoulli convolution
                                         µ = ∗∞
                                              i=0 Sλi ∆i .
         FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES              11
                                                       P
(Equivalently, µ is the distribution of the random sum ∞       i
                                                         i=0 λ Zi , where the Zi are
independent and have distribution ∆i .) We are interested in the situation in which
the ∆i are generated dynamically. Let (X, T) be a dynamical system, and suppose
∆ : X → A is a map such that, for some compact interval I0 , supp(∆(x)) ⊂ I0 for all
x ∈ X. Then we can consider the family of measures
                                              i
(1.3)                       µ x = ∗∞
                                   i=0 Sλi ∆(T x),   x ∈ X.
These measures enjoy a dynamical version of self-similarity. Write
                                        n−1
(1.4)                           µx,n = ∗i=0 Sλi ∆(Ti x).
Then, clearly,
(1.5)                            µx = µx,n ∗ Sλn µTn x .
  We will call the tuple X = (X, T, ∆, λ) a model generating the measures µx . We will
also refer to the measures µx themselves as dynamically driven self-similar measures.
  Trivially, Bernoulli convolutions also fall into this setting, with X the one-point
space.
1.5. Lq dimensions of dynamically driven self-similar measures. In order to prove
Theorem 1.2 along the lines we have been describing, we need to derive estimates
on the Lq dimensions of η1 ∗ Sex η2 for all values of x. As a matter of fact, by self-
similarity, it is enough to deal with all x in some nonempty open set, but it is not
enough to gain information for almost all values of x. Note that the underlying
dynamical system (X, T) is an irrational rotation on the circle (thanks to p and q being
multiplicatively independent) while, in the case of Bernoulli convolutions, (X, T) is
the trivial one-point system. In the general case of dynamically driven self-similar
measures generated by a model (X, T, ∆, λ), if one hopes to gain any information
for all x ∈ X, it is reasonable to impose strong rigidity and continuity assumptions
on the dynamics. The next definition, clearly satisfied by our two main classes of
examples, introduces the kind of regularity that will be needed in the abstract setting.
Recall that a Borel transformation T : X → X is called uniquely ergodic if there exists
exactly one Borel probability measure P on X such that T P = P.
Definition 1.9. We say that a model (X, T, ∆, λ) is pleasant if X is a compact metric
space, T is a uniquely ergodic transformation on X, the measures µx are all non-
atomic and supported on some fixed bounded interval, and the map x 7→ µx is con-
tinuous (in the weak topology), outside of a null set (with respect to the unique
invariant measure).
  In most of our applications, X will equal either the trivial group {0} or the circle,
and in all applications X will be a torus or the product of a torus and a cyclic group.
In all cases, T will be a translation on X. We recall that if X is a compact Abelian
group, and T(x) = x + y is translation by y ∈ X, then T is uniquely ergodic if and
only if the orbit {ny : n ∈ N} is dense in X. See e.g. [9, Theorem 4.14].
  We will also need to impose a separation condition, albeit an extremely weak one.
12                                  PABLO SHMERKIN

Definition 1.10. Let X = (X, T, ∆, λ) be a pleasant model with unique invariant mea-
sure P. We say that X has exponential separation if for P-almost all x there is R > 0
such that the following holds for infinitely many n: all the atoms of µx,n are distinct
and λRn -separated. By the atoms of µx,n being distinct we mean that
                                            n−1
                                            Y
                          |supp(µx,n )| =         |supp(∆(Ti x))|,
                                            i=0

i.e. there are no exact coincidences among the atoms that make up supp(µx,n ).
  This definition coincides with the notion of (lack of) super-exponential separation
introduced in [26] in the case of self-similar measures (i.e. when X is a one-point
set). As will become clear later, if X is infinite, then under very mild non-degeneracy
assumptions on the map ∆, exponential separation holds almost automatically.
  The following is the main result of the paper, from which more general versions
of Theorems 1.2, 1.3 and 1.5, as well as other applications, will follow.
Theorem 1.11. Let (X, T, ∆, λ) be a pleasant model with exponential separation, and denote
the unique invariant measure by P. Assume further that the map x 7→ ∆(x) is continuous
P-almost everywhere, and the number of atoms of ∆(x) is uniformly bounded. Then for all
q ∈ (1, +∞)
                        P                     R                         
                     log I∈Dm µx (I)q            X
                                                    log k∆(x)kqq dP(x)
(1.6)          lim −                    = min                          ,1 ,
              m→∞        (q − 1)m                     (q − 1) log λ
uniformly in x ∈ X. That is, the limit in the definition of Lq dimension of µx exists and
equals the constant value on the right-hand side, for all x ∈ X.
  In the above statement, and throughout the paper, the Lq norm of a finitely sup-
ported measure ∆ is given by
                                      X
                             k∆kqq =         ∆(y)q .
                                         y∈supp(∆)

  We underline that the exponential separation assumption has to be checked on
a set of full P-measure, and this is often very easy to do. On the other hand, the
conclusion of Theorem 1.11 holds for all x ∈ X.
1.6. Outline of proof. We conclude this introduction by presenting an outline of
the main steps of the proof of Theorem 1.11. The overall strategy is inspired by
the ideas of [26]. Additional complications are caused by the fact that our model
allows measures which are not strictly self-similar; this will be dealt with the help of
a cocycle introduced in [35]. The key difference, however, is that Hochman’s method
is based on entropy, while we need to deal with Lq norms. As we will see, this forces
substantial changes in the implementation of the general strategy.
   At the heart of [26] is an inverse theorem for the growth of entropy under con-
volutions, see [26, Theorem 2.7]. We prove an inverse theorem for the decay of Lq
         FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                13

norms under convolutions, which may be of independent interest. This theorem is
stated in Section 2 and proved in Section 3. Here we give a heuristic description. Let
µ, ν be two probability measures supported on 2−m Z ∩ [0, 1]. By Young’s inequal-
ity, kµ ∗ νkq ≤ kµkq . The question the inverse theorem aims to answer is: what can
be said if we are close to an equality? Here, and in the rest of the paper, “close” is
meant in a very weak sense: up to some small exponential loss. More concretely, the
inverse theorem asserts that if kµ ∗ νkq ≥ 2−εm kµkq for some small ε > 0, then µ and
ν are forced to have a multi-scale structure of a certain kind. We note that equality
in Young’s theorem happens if either µ is the uniform measure on 2−m Z ∩ [0, 1], or if
ν is a single atom. The inverse theorem asserts that, after restricting µ, ν to suitable
subsets A, B which are “large” and “regular” in a certain sense, there is a multi-
scale decomposition such that, at each scale, either µ|A is “almost uniform” or ν|B is
“almost discrete”. In spirit this is not unlike [26, Theorem 2.7], although the details
differ substantially; see Section 2 below for further discussion. The two main tools in
the proof of the inverse theorem come from additive combinatorics: an asymmetric
version of the Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers Theorem, due to Tao and Vu, and a struc-
ture result on sets with “small” sumset, due to Bourgain. These results are recalled
in Section 3.
   We note that the inverse theorem is a statement about arbitrary measures; no self-
similarity is involved. Now let us consider a pleasant model (X, T, ∆, λ) generating
measures µx , x ∈ X. The right-hand side in (1.6) is easily seen to be an upper bound
for the left-hand side (for all x), so the task is to show the reverse inequality. The
self-similarity expressed by (1.5), in conjunction with the pleasantness of the model,
can be used to show that there is a function T : (1, ∞) → [0, 1], such that τµx = T
for P-almost all x, and τµx ≥ T for all x ∈ X - see Proposition 4.6 and Corollary 4.8.
Thus, in order to complete the proof, one needs to show that T (q)/(q − 1) equals the
right-hand side of (1.6).
   We point out that the strategy of studying Lq dimensions via the function T (q) is
borrowed from [35]. The innovation of this work consists in being able to calculate
T (q) for a wider range of models and, crucially, for all finite q ≥ 1 (while the method
of [35], based on Marstrand’s projection theorem, is restricted to q ∈ (1, 2]).
   It is known from general considerations that T (q) is concave, so in particular it
is continuous and differentiable outside of at most a countable set. The rest of the
proof focuses on the study of T (q) for a fixed differentiability point q. The “mul-
tifractal structure” of a measure µ is known to behave in a regular way for points
q of differentiability of the spectrum τµ . Extending some elementary results in this
direction to the function T (q), we show that if α = T ′ (q) exists and τµx (q) = T (q)
(which we have seen happens for almost P      all x) then, for large enough m, “almost
                                                                         ∗
all” of the contribution to the sum I∈Dm µx (I)q comes from ≈ 2T (α)m intervals I
such that µx (I) ≈ 2αm ; here T ∗ is the Legendre transform of T . Moreover, using the
self-similarity of µx , we establish also a multi-scale version of this fact, see Proposi-
tion 4.13.
14                                       PABLO SHMERKIN

          (m)
     Let µx     supported on 2−m Z be given by
(1.7)                       µx(m) (j2−m ) = µx ([j2−m , (j + 1)2−m)).
          (m)                                                  (m)     P
Then µx is a discretization of µx at scale 2−m , and kµx kqq =                       q
                                                                          I∈Dm µx (I) .
2−mT (q) . The inverse theorem, together with the study of the multifractal structure of
µx , is used to show that either T (q) = q − 1 (in which case we are done) or, otherwise,
the following holds: if ρ is an arbitrary measure supported on 2−m Z ∩ [0, 1] such that
kρkq ≤ 2−σm , then
(1.8)                     kρ ∗ µx(m) kqq ≤ 2−εm 2−T (q)m   for all x ∈ X,
where ε = ε(σ, q) > 0. That is, convolving µx with ρ results in an exponential flat-
                                                                                (m)
tening of the Lq norm (a priori this is not necessarily true for all x, since kµx kqq can
be far smaller than 2−T (q)m for some x, but all that is needed later is an exponential
gain over 2−T (q)m ). The heuristic reason for this is the following: suppose the op-
posite is true. The inverse theorem then asserts that there is a regular subset A of
        (m)
supp(µx ) which captures much of the Lq norm. By the inverse theorem, and since
ρ is assumed to have exponentially small Lq norm, A must have almost full growth
(or branching) on a positive density set of scales in a multi-scale decomposition. But
A itself does not have full growth (this follows from the assumption T (q) < q − 1,
                     (m)
which rules out µx having too small Lq norm). So there must also be a positive
density set of scales on which A has smaller than average growth. The regularity of
the multifractal spectrum discussed above rules this out, since it forces A to have an
almost constant growth on almost all scales.
   The conclusion of the proof of Theorem 1.11 from (1.8) goes along the same lines
of [26]. By the exponential separation assumption, there is x ∈ X such that τµx (q) =
T (q) and, for some R = R(x) ∈ N,
                       (Rm)                            Pn−1
                log kµx,n kqq          kµx,n kqq             log k∆(Ti x)kqq
                               =                    = i=0                    ,
             (q − 1)n log(1/λ)    (q − 1)n log(1/λ)      (q − 1)n log(1/λ)
where m = m(n) is chosen so that 2−m ∼ λn . Under our running assumption that
T (q) < q−1, the ergodic theorem for uniquely ergodic systems implies that the right-
hand side above tends to the right-hand side of (1.6) as n → ∞. Hence, it remains to
show that
                                                (Rm)
                                        log kµx,n kqq
(1.9)                               lim               = T (q).
                                   n→∞ n log(1/λ)

In other words, we need to show that the Lq norm of µx,n at scale 2−m ≈ λn (which is
easily seen to be comparable to the Lq norm of µx at scale 2−m ) nearly exhausts the
Lq norm of µx,n at the much finer scale 2−Rm which, in turn, equals the full Lq norm
of µx,n , by the exponential separation assumption.
         FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                15

  To show (1.9), we recall that µx = µx,n ∗ Sλn µTn x , and use this to decompose
                                      X
                         µx((R+1)m) =      µ(I)eρI ∗ Sλn µTnx ,
                                       I∈Dm

where ρeI is the normalized restriction of µx,n to I. Since the supports of ρeI ∗ Sλn µTnx
have bounded overlap, it is not hard to deduce that
                                         X                 (Rm)
                       kµx((R+1)m) kqq ≈    µx (I)q kρI ∗ µTn x kqq ,
                                       I∈Dm

where ρI = Sλ−n ρeI . This is the point where we apply (1.8), to conclude that if on
the right-hand side above we only add over those I such that kρI kq ≥ 2−σq , where
σ > 0 is arbitrary, then, provided n is large enough depending on σ, we still capture
almost all of the left-hand side. This follows since (1.8) can be shown to imply that
the contribution of the remaining I is exponentially smaller than the left-hand side.
                                    ((R+1)m)              ((R+1)m)
A similar calculation, now with µx,n         in place of µx        in the left-hand side,
then shows that (1.9) holds, finishing the proof.
  We point out that, simultaneously and independently of this work, Meng Wu [52]
obtained an elegant alternative proof of Theorem 1.2. Wu’s proof is purely ergodic-
theoretical and completely different from ours. His methods do not seem to yield
any analogs of Theorem 1.11 and, in particular, are unable to reproduce our results
on the dimensions and densities of Bernoulli convolutions. Nevertheless, some of
our concrete applications (besides Furstenberg’s conjecture) also follow from Wu’s
approach: this is the case for Corollaries 7.3 and 8.3.
1.7. Organization of the paper and summary of applications. We outline the or-
ganization of the rest of the paper. Sections 2–5 are devoted to the proof of Theo-
rem 1.11, while the remaining Sections 6–9 contain the applications of Theorem 1.11.
More precisely:
     • In Section 2 we state and discuss the inverse theorem for the Lq norms of
       convolutions of discrete measures. The inverse Theorem is proved in Section
       3.
     • Section 4 develops some properties of dynamically driven self-similar mea-
       sures. In Section 5, these are combined with the inverse theorem to conclude
       the proof of Theorem 1.11.
     • In Section 6 we apply Theorem 1.11 to study Lq dimensions and Frostman ex-
       ponents of self-similar measures on the line. In particular, we prove Theorem
       6.2, which generalizes Theorem 1.5 to homogeneous self-similar measures on
       R, and Theorem 6.6, which extends this to arbitrary self-similar measures on
       the line (not necessarily homogeneous).
     • In Section 7, we conclude the proof of Theorem 1.2. We also study the Lq
       dimensions of convolutions of self-similar measures (Theorems 7.2 and 7.5),
       and deduce a variant of Furstenberg’s conjecture for self-similar sets, Corol-
       lary 7.3.
16                                 PABLO SHMERKIN

     • Section 8 contains further applications of Theorem 1.11 to projections and sec-
       tions of planar self-similar sets and measures. In particular, we prove an up-
       per bound for the dimensions of arbitrary linear sections of some self-similar
       sets on the plane, see Corollary 8.3.
     • Finally, in Section 9 we turn our focus to the densities of the measures studied
       in the previous sections. We present a general result in the framework of dy-
       namically defined measures, Theorem 9.1, and deduce Theorem 1.3, as well
       as several other applications, as corollaries.




1.8. Notation. We use Landau’s O(·) and related notation: if X, Y are two positive
quantities, then Y = O(X) means that Y ≤ CX for some constant C > 0, while
Y = Ω(X) means that X = O(Y ), and Y = Θ(X) that Y = O(X) and X = O(Y ).
If the constant C is allowed to depend on some parameters, these are often denoted
by subscripts. For example, Y = Oq (X) means that Y ≤ C(q)X, where C(q) is a
function depending on the parameter q.
   The following table summarizes some of the notational conventions to be used
throughout the paper.
         FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES             17

   N                    Natural numbers {1, 2, . . .}
   B(x, r)              Open ball of center x, radius r.
   dimH                 Hausdorff dimension
   dimB                 Upper box-counting dimension
   [n]                  {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}
   δ, ε, η, κ, σ        Small positive numbers
   µ, ν, η, ρ           Measures (always positive and finite, often discrete)
   µ(m)                 Discretization of µ at scale 2−m
   k · kq               Discrete Lq norm
   q′                   Dual exponent to q
   δt , δ(t)            Delta mass at t
   A                    Space of finitely supported measures
   ∆i , ∆e              Elements of A
   ∆(x)                 A-valued functions
   (X, T, ∆, λ)         A model generating DDSSMs
   µx                   The DDSSM corresponding to x ∈ X
   µx,n                 Discrete approximations to µx
   Sλ                   Map that scales by λ
   τ (µ, q) or τµ (q)   Lq spectrum
   D(µ, q) or Dµ (q)    Lq dimension
   E, Ei                Small exceptional sets
   Ds                   Dyadic intervals of length 2−s
   Ds (A)               Elements of Ds hitting A
   Ns (A) or N (A, s)   |Ds (A)|
   D                    2D =base for tree representation of sets
   ℓ                    Height of tree representing a set
   S, S ′ , Si          Subsets of [ℓ] (representing sets of scales)
   Rs , Rs′ , Rs′′      Branching numbers of trees representing regular sets
   T (q)                The function from Proposition 4.6
   f, g, h              Maps R → R, often affine
   (fi )i∈I             Iterated function system of similarities

  Acknowledgments. I am grateful to Mike Hochman and Izabella Łaba for inspir-
ing discussion related to the themes in this paper, and to Julien Barral and Eino Rossi
for a careful reading and for suggesting numerous small corrections. I also thank the
anonymous referees for helpful comments.

 2. A N INVERSE THEOREM FOR THE DECAY OF Lq NORMS UNDER CONVOLUTION
  Let µ, ν be probability measures on R (or the circle R/Z). For any reasonable notion
of smoothness, the convolution µ ∗ ν is at least as smooth as ν. A natural question is
then: if µ ∗ ν is not “much smoother” than µ, can we deduce any information about
18                                  PABLO SHMERKIN

the measures µ and ν? Of course, this depends on the notion of smoothness under
consideration, and on the precise meaning of “much smoother”.
  We are interested in general, possibly fractal, measures, and their discrete approx-
imations. A general method for defining notions of dimension (or smoothness) of
a measure is to discretize it at a certain scale ε, measure smoothness at that scale in
some standard way (for example, by means of entropy or Lq norms) and then study
the growth/decay of this quantity as ε ↓ 0. Indeed, we have seen that Lq dimensions
are defined precisely in this way, and there is a parallel notion for entropy.
  Let µ be a probability measure on R/Z. Its normalized level m entropy is
                                      1 X
                           Hm (µ) =           −µ(I) log(µ(I)),
                                      m I∈D
                                           m


with the usual convention 0 log 0 = 0. In [26, Theorem 2.7], Hochman showed that if
                               Hm (ν ∗ µ) ≤ Hm (µ) + ε,
where ε > 0 is small, then ν and µ have a certain structure which, very roughly, is of
this form: the set of dyadic scales 0 ≤ s < m can be split into three sets A ∪ B ∪ C. At
scales in A, the measure ν looks “roughly atomic”, at scales in B the measure µ looks
“roughly uniform”, and the set C is small. This theorem was motivated in part by its
applications to the dimension theory of self-similar measures, as discussed above.
   Our goal is to develop a corresponding theory for Lq norms. Given m ∈ N, we will
say that µ is a 2−m -measure if µ is a probability measure supported on 2−m Z ∩ [0, 1)
(and we sometimes identify [0, 1) with the circle). Recall from (1.7) that if µ is a
probability measure on [0, 1), we denote by µ(m) the associated 2−m -measure, that
is, µ(m) (j2−m ) = µ([j2−m , (j + 1)2−m )). We also recall that, given a purely atomic
measure µ, we define the Lq norms
                                         X        1/q
                                 kµkq =      µ(y)q      ,

and kµk∞ = maxy µ(y).
   From now on, the convolutions are always assumed to take place on the circle
unless otherwise indicated; however, all results immediately transfer to the real line,
using the fact that the map (x, y) 7→ x + y is two-to-one on the circle so, for example,
if µ, ν are 2−m -measures, then the Lq norms of µ ∗ ν as convolutions on the circle or
the real line are comparable up to a multiplicative constant.
   By Young’s inequality (which in this context is a direct consequence the convexity
of t 7→ tq ), we know that kµ ∗ νkq ≤ kµkq , for any q ≥ 1. We aim to understand under
what circumstances kµ ∗ νkq ≈ kµkq , where the closeness is in a weak, exponential
sense. More precisely, we are interested in what structural properties of the measures
µ, ν ensure an exponential flattening of the Lq norm of the form
(2.1)                        k(µ ∗ ν)(m) kq ≤ 2−εm kµ(m) kq .
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                19

The Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers Theorem (particularly, its asymmetric formulation,
see Theorem 3.2 below) can be seen as providing a partial answer in a special case,
i.e. when µ(m) , ν (m) are indicator functions.
   While we are not aware of any general results in this direction, we note that a
special case has received considerable attention: if A ⊂ 2−m Z, then k1A ∗ 1A k22 is
nothing but the additive energy of A (see (3.1) below), and estimates of the form
                                   k1A ∗ 1A k22 ≤ |A|3−ε
arise repeatedly in dynamics, combinatorics and analysis: see e.g. [8, 1] for some
recent examples. In particular, S. Dyatlov and J. Zahl [8, Theorem 6] showed that if
µ is an Ahlfors-regular measure, that is, if there are C, s > 0 such that
              C −1 r s ≤ µ(B(x, r)) ≤ Cr s   for all x ∈ supp(µ), r ∈ (0, 1],
then
                              k(µ ∗ µ)(m) k ≤ 2−εm kµ(m) k2 ,
where ε > 0 depends only on the parameters C, s. Their proof does not appear to
readily extend to the convolution of two different measures, or beyond the Ahlfors-
regular case. Outside of the Euclidean setting, the L2 norm of self-convolutions has
been studied in many groups as part of the Bourgain-Gamburd expansion machine
developed to prove that Cayley graphs are expanders, see e.g. [6].
   Here we go in a different direction, by investigating general geometric condi-
tions on the measures µ, ν that ensure flattening in the sense of (2.1). We make the
trivial observation that if ν = δk2−m or µ = λ =Lebesgue measure on R/Z, then
k(µ ∗ ν)(m) kq = kµ(m) kq . Furthermore, if ν = 2−εm δx + (1 − 2εm )λ and µ is an arbitrary
measure, then we still have k(µ ∗ ν)(m) kq ≥ 2−εm kµ(m) kq . This shows that a subset
of measure 2−εm is able to prevent smoothening in the sense of (2.1), so that (unlike
the case of entropy) in order to guarantee exponential smoothing we need to im-
pose conditions on the structure of the measures inside sets of exponentially small
measure.
   There are also less trivial situations in which kµ ∗ µkq ≈ kµkq . Let D ≫ 1 be a
large integer, fix ℓ ≫ D, and for given subset S of {0, . . . , ℓ − 1} define A as the
set of all x ∈ 2−ℓD Z ∩ [0, 1), such that the s-th digit in the 2−D -base expansion of
x is 0 for all s ∈ S (and is arbitrary otherwise). Then it is not hard to check that
k1A ∗ 1A kq ≈ k1A k1 k1A kq . In more combinatorial terms, A looks like an arithmetic
progression at all scales. In similar ways one constructs probability measures µ, ν
supported on sets of widely different sizes, such that kµ ∗ νkq ≈ kµkq .
   Our inverse theorem asserts that if (2.1) fails to hold then one can find subsets
A ⊂ supp(µ) and B ⊂ supp(ν), such that A captures a “large” proportion of the
Lq norm of µ and B a “large” proportion of the mass of ν, and moreover µ|A , ν|B
are fairly regular (for example, they are constant up to a factor of 2). The main
conclusion, however, is that A and B have a structure resembling the example above,
and also the conclusion of Hochman’s inverse theorem for entropy: if D is a large
20                                       PABLO SHMERKIN

enough integer, then for each s, either B has no branching between scales 2sD and
2(s+1)D (in other words, once the first s digits in the 2D -adic expansion of y ∈ B are
fixed, the next digit is uniquely determined), or A has nearly full branching between
scales 2sD and 2(s+1)D (whatever the first s digits of x ∈ A in the 2D -adic expansion,
the next digit can take almost any value).
   Before stating the theorem, we summarize our notation for dyadic intervals to be
used throughout the paper (some of it was introduced before):
      • Ds is the family of dyadic intervals [j2−s , (j + 1)2−s ). We also refer to elements
        of Ds as 2−s -intervals.
      • Given a set A ⊂ R or R/Z, we write Ds (A) for the family of 2−s -intervals
        that hit A. We also write N (A, s) or Ns (A) for |Ds (A)|, i.e. the number of 2−s
        intervals that hit A.
      • Given x ∈ R or R/Z, we write Ds (x) for the only 2−s -interval that contains x.
      • We write aI for the interval of the same center as I and length a times the
        length of I.
We also write [ℓ] = {0, 1, . . . , ℓ − 1}.
Theorem 2.1. Given q ∈ (1, ∞), δ > 0 and D0 ∈ N, there are ε > 0, D ≥ D0 , such that
the following holds for all large enough ℓ.
  Let m = ℓD, and let µ, ν be 2−m -measures such that
                                       kµ ∗ νkq ≥ 2−εm kµkq .
After translating the measures µ, ν by appropriate numbers of the form k2−m , there exist sets
A ⊂ supp(µ), B ⊂ supp(ν), such that:
  (A-i) kµ|A kq ≥ 2−δm kµkq , where µ|A denotes the (non-normalized) restriction of µ to A.
 (A-ii) µ(y) ≤ 2µ(x) for all x, y ∈ A.
(A-iii) There is a sequence Rs′ , s ∈ [ℓ], such that N(s+1)D (A ∩ I) = Rs′ for all I ∈ DsD (A).
(A-iv) x ∈ 21 DsD (x) for every x ∈ A, s ∈ [ℓ].
   (B-i) ν(B) ≥ 2−δm .
  (B-ii) ν(y) ≤ 2ν(x) for all x, y ∈ B.
 (B-iii) There is a sequence Rs′′ , s ∈ [ℓ], such that N(s+1)D (B ∩ I) = Rs′′ for all I ∈ DsD (B).
 (B-iv) y ∈ 21 DsD (y) for every y ∈ B, s ∈ [ℓ].
    Moreover,
     (v) For each s, either Rs′′ = 1, or
(2.2)                                      Rs′ ≥ 2(1−δ)D .
     (vi) Let S be the set of s such that (2.2) holds. Then
                                   ′                             ′
                        log(kνkq−q ) − δm ≤ D|S| ≤ log(kµkq−q ) + δm.
 Here, and throughout the paper, q ′ = q/(q − 1) denotes the dual exponent. We
make some remarks on the statement.
         FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                21

     a) The initial translation of the measures, as well as their convolution, take place
        on the circle. However, by decomposing the measures into finitely many
        pieces it is easy to deduce the same statement with both the translation and
        the convolution taking place on the real line.
     b) The translation is only needed for (A-iv) and (B-iv), which are technical claims
        that we include in the theorem as they are often useful in applications.
     c) The main claim in the theorem is part (v). Obtaining sets A, B satisfying (A-
        i)–(A-iv) and (B-i)–(B-iv) is not hard, and (vi) is a straightforward calculation
        using (v).
     d) The theorem fails for q = 1 and q = ∞. In the first case there is an equality
        kµ ∗ νk1 = kµk1 for any 2−m -measures, and in the second case there is always
        an equality k1A ∗ 1−A k∞ = k1A k1 . On the other hand, the case of arbitrary
        1 < q < ∞ is easily reduced to the case q = 2: see Lemma 3.4 below.
   We emphasize that the proof of Theorem 2.1 (including the proofs of the results
it relies on) is elementary, in particular avoiding any use of the Fourier transform
or quantitative probabilistic estimates such as the Berry-Esseen Theorem, which is
crucial in the approach of [26]. The value of ε is effective in principle, although it
is certainly very poor; the worst loss occurs in the application of the asymmetric
Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers Theorem (Theorem 3.2 below).

                        3. P ROOF OF THE INVERSE THEOREM
3.1. Preliminaries. In this section we prove Theorem 2.1. We begin by describing
the two main tools involved in the proof: a version of the Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers
Theorem that is effective even when the sets have very different sizes, due to Tao
and Vu, and the additive part of Bourgain’s discretized sum-product theorem. We
begin with the latter.
   We say that A ⊂ [0, 1] or R/Z is a 2−m -set if each element of A is an integer multiple
of 2−m . For a finite set A ⊂ R, we define its doubling constant as σ[A] = |A + A|/|A|.
We will call a 2−m set A such that σ[A] ≤ 2δm an (m, δ)-small doubling set.
   The structure of sets A such that σ[A] ≤ K (where K is independent of |A|) is
characterized by Freiman’s Theorem (see e.g. [49, Theorem 5.32]): such sets can be
densely embedded in a generalized arithmetic progression. However Freiman’s The-
orem gives no information when the doubling constant grows exponentially with
the size of the set. The following structural property of sets with small exponen-
tial doubling is proved by Bourgain [5]. Although it is not explicitly stated in [5],
this theorem emerges from the constructions in Sections 2 and 3, in particular see [5,
Equations (3.15), (3.20), (3.21), (3.22)].
Theorem 3.1. Given a large T ∈ N, the following holds for sufficiently large m1 ∈ N
(depending on T ).
  Let m = m1 T , and suppose H is a (m, 2−2T −1 )-small doubling set. Then H contains a
subset H ′ such that the following holds:
22                                      PABLO SHMERKIN
                          √
    (i). |H ′| ≥ 2−(2 log T / T )m |H|.
   (ii). There are a set S ⊂ {0, . . . , m1 − 1} and integers Rs , ns , s ∈ S, with ns ∈ [sT, (s +
         1)T ), such that:
                   / S, then N (H ′ ∩ I, (s + 1)T ) = 1 for each I ∈ DsT (H ′ ).
          (a) If s ∈
          (b) If s ∈ S, then N (H ′ ∩ I, ns ) = Rs for each I ∈ DsT (H ′), and N (H ′ ∩ J, (s +
               1)T ) = 1 for each J ∈ Dns (H ′).
                     −1/2 )(n −sT )
          (c) 2(1−T          s
                                    < Rs ≤ 2ns −sT for all s ∈ S.
                         Q
In particular, |H ′| = s∈S Rs .
   Thus, the theorem says that a set with small exponential doubling contains a fairly
dense subset which has no branching between the scales 2−T s and 2−(T +1)s for s ∈  /S
and between the scales 2−ns and 2−(T +1)s for s ∈ S; and has “uniform and nearly full
branching” between the scales 2−T s and 2ns , s ∈ S.
   We remark that the proof of Theorem 3.1 is ingenious but elementary, only rely-
ing on the Plünnecke-Ruzsa inequalities, for which a short elementary proof was
recently found by Petridis [41].
   Another crucial ingredient in the proof of Theorem 2.1 is the following version
of the celebrated Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers Theorem, due to Tao and Vu [49], which
allows the sets to have widely different sizes. Recall that the additive energy between
two finite sets A, B in a common ambient group is
(3.1)      E(A, B) = |{(a1 , a2 , b1 , b2 ) ∈ A2 × B 2 : a1 + b1 = a2 + b2 }| = k1A ∗ 1B k22 .
Theorem 3.2 (Asymmetric Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers). Given κ > 0, there is τ > 0 such
that the following holds for m ∈ N large enough. Let A, B ⊂ [0, 1] or R/Z be 2−m -sets such
that
                       E(A, B) ≥ 2−τ m |A||B|2 = 2−τ m k1B k21 k1A k22 .
Then there are a (m, κ)-small doubling set H and a 2−m -set X such that:
      (i). |A ∩ (X + H)| ≥ 2−κm |A| ≥ 2−2κm |X||H|,
     (ii). |B ∩ H| ≥ 2−κm |B|.
Proof. This follows from [49, Theorem 2.35]. Indeed, take L = 2m , α = 2−τ m /2,
ε = κ/4. Then by making τ > 0 small enough in terms of κ, we can ensure that
                                       
                       Ωκ αOκ (1) L−κ/4 ≥ Ωκ (2−(κ/2)m ) ≥ 2−κm
if δ is small enough and m large enough in terms of κ.                                           

   Thus, the theorem asserts that a big part of B is contained in a set with small
doubling H, and a big part of A is densely contained in a union of (nearly) disjoint
translates of H (with X being the set of translations). In particular, H cannot be much
smaller than B (but it can be much larger), and X has size approximately |A|/|H|.
The proof of Theorem 3.2 is also elementary, although it is rather lengthy.
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES              23

3.2. Overview. We give a rough sketch of the proof of the inverse theorem. Our
goal is to apply the asymmetric Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers Theorem, Theorem 3.2.
In §3.3 we present two lemmas involving Lq norms. Recall that our assumption is
that kµ ∗ νkq ≥ 2−εm kµkq . In Lemma 3.3 we extract two sets A, B, which already
satisfy properties (A-i), (A-ii), (B-i), (B-ii), and such that similar bounds hold for
their indicator functions. Lemma 3.4 (a simple application of Hölder’s inequality)
shows that one can pass from the Lq norm to the L2 norm, enabling the application
of Theorem 3.2.
  In §3.4, we present some combinatorial regularization lemmas, inspired in [5].
Theorem 3.2 produces a set H of small exponential doubling such that B + H is
not much larger than H and A + H is not much larger than A. Together with the
information on the structure of H provided by Theorem 3.1 (or, rather, the version
given by Corollary 3.10 below), and with the lemmas in §3.4, this allows us to deduce
the remaining properties of A and B (after passing to suitable dense subsets).
  Finally, (vi) is a straightforward consequence of the previous claims.
  A point of notation: throughout this section, ℓ and m will denote sufficiently large
integers (given any other relevant data); any inequalities involving them are under-
stood to hold if they are larger than a constant that is allowed to depend on any other
parameters involved.
3.3. Analytical lemmas. We begin with a lemma, based on Young’s inequality and
dyadic pigeonholing, that enables the use of the Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers Theorem.
It is an Lq asymmetric version of (the proof of) [6, Proposition 2].
Lemma 3.3. Given ε > 0 and q ∈ (1, ∞), the following holds for large enough m ∈ N.
Suppose µ, ν are 2m -measures satisfying kµ ∗ νkq ≥ 2−εm kµkq . Then there exist j, j ′ ≤
2εq ′m such that, setting
                                               ′                 ′
                         A = {x : 2−j−1kµkqq < µ(x) ≤ 2−j kµkqq },
                                       ′                   ′
                         B = {y : 2−j −1 2−m < ν(y) ≤ 2−j 2−m },
the following holds:
    (i). k1A ∗ 1B kq ≥ 2−2εm k1A kq k1B k1 ,
   (ii). kµ|A kq ≥ 2−2εm kµkq ,
  (iii). kν|B k1 = ν(B) ≥ 2−2εm .
Proof. We use the notation X & Y to mean X ≥ C −1 m−C Y , where C > 0 depends on
q only. For j ∈ Z, let
                                               ′                  ′
                         Aj = {x : 2−j−1 kµkqq < µ(x) ≤ 2−j kµkqq },
                         Bj = {y : 2−j−12−m < ν(y) ≤ 2−j 2−m }.
Firstly, note that Aj = ∅, Bj = ∅ if j ≤ −(m + 1) since, by Hölder’s inequality,
                           X                  ′          ′
                      1=      µ(x) ≤ kµkq 2m/q =⇒ kµkqq ≥ 2−m .
                              x
24                                        PABLO SHMERKIN

Write ℓ = ⌈2εq ′m⌉, and let E = ∪j≥ℓ Aj , F = ∪j≥ℓ Bj . Note that
                                           X
                        q               q−1
                  kµ|E kq ≤ max µ(x)             µ(x) ≤ 2−ℓ(q−1) kµkqq ,
                                   x∈E
                                                  x∈E
                                            m −ℓ−m
                    kν|F k1 = ν(F ) ≤ 2 2            = 2−ℓ .
By Young’s inequality,
                                                                 ′
                max(kµ|E ∗ νkq , kµ ∗ ν|F kq ) ≤ 2−ℓ/q kµkq ≤ 2−εm kµ ∗ νkq .
It follows from the bilinearity of convolution and the triangle inequality that, if m ≫ε
1,
                            X                         1
                                    kµ|Aj ∗ ν|Bj′ kq ≥ kµ ∗ νkq .
                                                      2
                             −m≤j,j <ℓ
                                ′

Pigeonholing and applying Young’s inequality once again, we can pick j, j ′ < ℓ such
that, setting A = Aj , B = Bj ′ , we have
                   kµ|A kq kν|B k1 ≥ kµ|A ∗ ν|B kq & kµ ∗ νkq ≥ 2−εmkµkq
                                                                                   ′
From here it follows that kν|B k1 & 2−εm and kµ|A kq & 2−εm kµkq . Note that 2j +m &
|B|. We conclude that
                                                     ′   ′
                        k1A ∗ 1B kq & (2j kµkq−q 2j +m )kµ|A ∗ ν|B kq
                                                     ′   ′
                                         & (2j kµkq−q 2j +m )2−εm kµ|A kq
                                         & 2−εm k1A kq k1B k1 .
                                                                                        
  The following simple consequence of Hölder’s inequality will allow us to apply
the Balog-Szmerédi-Gowers also in the context of Lq norms, q ∈ (1, +∞).
Lemma 3.4. Let A, B be two 2−m -sets and let q ∈ (1, ∞). If k1A ∗ 1B kq ≥ 2−κm |A|1/q |B|,
then
                                                 ′
                        k1A ∗ 1B k22 ≥ 2−(max(q,q ))κm |A||B|2.
Proof. Consider first the case q ∈ (1, 2). Applying Hölder’s inequality in the form
                                                          !2−q            !q−1
         X             X                         X              X
             f (x)q =     f (x)2−q f (x)2(q−1) ≤    f (x)          f (x)2
           x             x                                   x                x
to f = 1A ∗ 1B yields
                                                                     2(q−1)
                        k1A ∗ 1B kqq ≤ |A|2−q |B|2−q k1A ∗ 1B k2              .
Hence, using the assumption,
                         2(q−1)        |A||B|q
               k1A ∗ 1B k2        ≥ 2−qκm         = 2−qκm |A|q−1 |B|2(q−1) ,
                                    |A|2−q |B|2−q
which gives the claim when q ∈ (1, 2).
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                 25

  Suppose now q ∈ (2, +∞). Then
      2−qκm |A||B|q ≤ k1A ∗ 1B kqq ≤ k1A ∗ 1B k22 k1A ∗ 1B k∞
                                                            q−2
                                                                ≤ k1A ∗ 1B k22 |B|q−2,
and this completes the proof.                                                             

3.4. Combinatorial lemmas. In this section we establish several elementary combi-
natorial lemmas. In both the statement and the proof of Theorem 2.1 an important
rôle is played by sets with a “regular tree structure”. We begin by formalizing this
concept. Recall that [ℓ] = {0, 1, . . . , ℓ − 1}.
Definition 3.5. Let D, ℓ ∈ N and set m = ℓD. Given a sequence (Rs )s∈[ℓ] taking values
in [1, 2D ], we say that a 2−m -set A is (D, ℓ, R)-uniform if N (A ∩ I, (s + 1)D) = Rs for
each s ∈ [ℓ] and I ∈ Dsℓ (A).
  Further, we say that A is (D, ℓ)-uniform if there is a sequence R such that A is
(D, ℓ, R)-uniform.
  Given an arbitrary 2−m -set A and D|m, one may associate to it the tree whose
vertices of level s are the 2−sD -intervals intersecting A. Then A is (D, ℓ)-uniform if
and only if the associated tree is spherically symmetric, i.e. the number of offspring
of a vertex is constant over all vertices at the same distance to the root (but may
vary between vertices of different levels). We will often informally refer to the tree
description of sets, for example by speaking of branching at certain levels.
  In our first lemma we show that any 2−m set contains a fairly large uniform subset.
This fact goes back at least to [5]; we provide details for completeness.
Lemma 3.6. Let D, ℓ ∈ N, and let A be a 2−m -set, where m = ℓD. Then there exists a
(D, ℓ)-uniform subset A′ ⊂ A such that
                          |A′ | ≥ (2D)−ℓ |A| = 2(− log(2D)/D)m |A|.
Proof. The construction is similar to that in [5, Section 2]. We begin from the bottom
of the tree, setting A(ℓ) := A. Once A(s+1) is constructed, we let
           [
  A(s,j) = {A(s+1) ∩ J : J ∈ DsD (A(s+1) ), N (J ∩ A(s+1) , (s + 1)D) ∈ [2j + 1, 2j+1]}.

Since j takes at most D values, we can pick j = js such that |A(s,j)| ≥ |A(s+1) |/D. By
removing at most half of the intervals in A(s+1) from each interval J making up A(s,j),
we obtain a set A(s) such that |A(s) | ≥ |A(s+1) |/(2D) and N (J ∩ A(s) , (s + 1)D) = 2j for
all J ∈ DsD (A(s) ). We see inductively that N (J ∩ A(s) , (s′ + 1)D) is constant over all
J ∈ Ds′D (A(s) ), for all s′ = s, s + 1, . . . , ℓ − 1.
   The lemma follows by taking A′ = A(0) .                                                
  The next simple lemma (which is also implicit in [5]) asserts that, given a (D, ℓ, R)-
uniform set, it is possible to reduce some of the numbers Rs to 1 without decreasing
the size of the set too much.
26                                     PABLO SHMERKIN

Lemma 3.7. Given D, ℓ ∈ N, the following holds. Suppose A is (D, ℓ, R)-uniform. Then, if
S ⊂ [ℓ] is any set, there exists a subset A′ ⊂ A which is (D, ℓ, R′) uniform, where Rs′ = 1
for s ∈ S and Rs′ = Rs for s ∈ [ℓ] \ S, and
                                               !
                                       Y 1
                             |A′ | ≥             |A| ≥ 2−|S|D |A|.
                                       s∈S
                                           R s


Proof. We inductively construct a sequence of sets A(s) , s ∈ [ℓ]. Set A(0) = A. Once
A(s) is defined, if s ∈/ S set A(s+1) = A(s) . Otherwise, for each I ∈ DsD (A(s) ), let JI
be any interval in D(s+1)D (A ∩ I), and let A(s+1) be the union of all such intervals JI .
Since Rs ≤ 2D , it is clear that A′ = A(ℓ−1) has the desired properties.                
  Given a set A, the next lemma extracts a large subset A′ of a suitable translation of
A, such that points in A′ are “not too close to the boundary” of 2D -adic intervals.
Lemma 3.8. Let D ∈ N≥2 , ℓ ∈ N, and let A be a 2−m -set in R/Z, where m = ℓD. Then
there are a point x = k2−m , and a subset A′ ⊂ A such that:
    (i). |A′ | ≥ 2−(log 3/D)m |A|.
   (ii). For all y ∈ A′ and all s ∈ [ℓ], y + x ∈ 12 DsD (y + x).
Proof. We note the following simple fact: for any y ∈ [0, 1) and any j ≤ m − 2, there
is t ∈ {−2−(j+2) , 0, 2−(j+2) } such that y + t ⊂ 21 Dj (y). With this in mind, we prune the
tree in a similar way to Lemma 3.6 to construct sets A(s) , starting from A(ℓ) = A and
moving up to A(0) , such that for each s ∈ [ℓ],
                                                                                 P
     (1) There is ts ∈ {−2−(sD+2) , 0, 2−(sD+2)} such that y + xs := y + sℓ−1         ′ =s ts′ ∈
         1                             (s)
           D (y + xs ), for all y ∈ A .
         2 sD
     (2) Moreover, |A(s) | ≥ |A(s+1) |/3.
                Pℓ−1
Set x = x0 = s=0        ts and A′ = A(0) . It is clear that |A′ | ≥ 3−ℓ |A| = 2−(log 3/D)m |A|.
             Ps−1
Also, since s′ =0 ts′ is a multiple of 2−sD , we have y + x ∈ DsD (y + x) for all y ∈ A′
and s ∈ [ℓ], as claimed.                                                                       
  The next lemma will allow us to show that if H has small doubling and A + H is
“not too large”, then A and H have a certain shared structure.
Lemma 3.9. Let D, ℓ ∈ N, and write m = ℓD. Suppose H, A are 2−m -sets such H is
(D, ℓ, R)-uniform and A is (D, ℓ, R′)-uniform. Then
                                                    Y
                            |A + H| ≥ 2−(1/D)m |H|    Rs′ .
                                                       s:Rs=1

Proof. Write S = {s : Rs = 1}. By replacing A with the subset given by Lemma 3.7,
we may assume that Rs′ = 1 for all s ∈        / S. This makes the problem symmetric: for
each s, either Rs = 1 or Rs′ = 1. With this in mind, we inductively show that for each
s = 0, 1, . . . , ℓ, there are families Is ⊂ DsD (A), Js ⊂ DsD (H), such that:
   (1) |Is ||Js | ≥ 2−s NsD (A)NsD (H)
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                         27

    (2) The intervals {I + J : I ∈ Is , J ∈ Js } are pairwise disjoint.
The base case s = 0 is trivial. Suppose this holds for some s < ℓ. Without loss of
generality, Rs+1 = 1. Hence, for each J ∈ Js we pick the single J ′ ∈ D(s+1)D (J ∩
H) and let Js+1 be the union of all such J ′ . Next, for each I ∈ Is , let (Ij′ )N
                                                                                 j=1 be a
                                                                                   I

                                                               ′
subcollection of D(s+1)D (I ∩ A) such that no two of the Ij are adjacent, and NI ≥
  ′
⌈Rs+1 /2⌉. We let Is+1 be the union of all Ij′ over all I ∈ Is . It is clear from this
construction that (1)–(2) hold.
  The claim follows from (1)–(2) applied with s = ℓ.                                   
  We conclude this section with a version of Theorem 3.1 in which the lengths of the
intervals over which there is either no or close to full branching is kept constant (at
the price of worsening the quantitative estimates). This reduction is a matter of sim-
plicity; a version of Theorem 2.1 in which the intervals of almost full/no branching
have varying lengths could be deduced directly from Theorem 3.1.
Corollary 3.10. Given a large D ∈ N, the following holds for sufficiently large ℓ ∈ N
(depending on D).
                                       2
  Let m = ℓD. Suppose H is an (m, 2−2D −1 )-small doubling set. Then there is a subset
H1 ⊂ H such that the following holds:
                           −1/4
    (i). |H1 | ≥ 2−(4(log D)D )m |H|.
   (ii). H1 is (D, ℓ, R)-uniform, where for each u either Ru = 1, or log Ru ≥ (1 − D −1/4 )D.
                        Q
In particular, |H1 | = u:Ru >1 Ru .
                        es (in place of Rs ) be as given by Theorem 3.1 with T = D 2 . We
Proof. Let H ′, S, ns , R
assume that m is a multiple of T ; the general case can be deduced by applying this
special casePto max{m1 T : m1 T ≤ m}.
  Let S = s∈S ns − sT . If S < T −1/4 m, then
                                  √                       √         −1/4 m           −1/4 m
               |H| ≤ 2(2 log T / T )m |H ′| ≤ 2(2 log T / T )m 2T            ≤ 22T            .
so that a singleton satisfies the conditions in the statement. We therefore assume that
S ≥ T −1/4 m.
  We apply Lemma 3.6 to H ′ and D, to obtain a (D, ℓ, R)-uniform set H ′′ such that
(3.2)                                 |H ′′| ≥ 2−(log(2D)/D)m |H ′ |,
It is clear that Ru = 1 for all u of the form sD + j, j ∈ [D], with s ∈
                                                                      / S, and also
with s ∈ S and jD ≥ ns − sT , since over those scales already H ′ had no branching.
Therefore, there is a set U such that Ru = 1 for u ∈
                                                   / U, and
(3.3)                     D|U| ≤ S + (m/T )D ≤ S(1 + D −1/2 ),
using that S ≥ D −1/2 m. Using Theorem 3.1, (3.2) and S ≥ D −1/2 m again, we get
                                                                  log(2D) 1/2
                   (1 − 1/D)S ≤ log |H ′ | ≤ log |H ′′| +                D S,
                                                                     D
28                                        PABLO SHMERKIN

so that, recalling (3.3),
                                                              1 − (2 log D)D −1/2
          log |H ′′| ≥ S(1 − 1/D − log(2D)D −1/2 ) ≥                              D|U|.
                                                                  1 + D −1/2
Hence,
                      1 X log Ru   log |H ′′ |
                                 =             ≥ 1 − 3(log D)D −1/2 .
                     |U| u∈U D       D|U|
Since log Ru /D ∈ [0, 1] for all u, Markov’s inequality yields that log(Ru ) ≥ (1 −
D −1/4 )|D| for u outside of a set U ′ with
                     |U ′ | ≤ 3(log D)D −1/4 |U| ≤ 3(log D)D −1/4 m/D,
provided D is larger than an absolute constant. To obtain our final set H1 , we apply
Lemma 3.7 to H ′′ and the set U ′ (that is, we collapse all Ru intervals to a single one
for u ∈ U ′ ). Recalling Theorem 3.1(i) and (3.2), the resulting set satisfies
                                           ′                        −1/4 m
                            |H1 | ≥ 2−D|U | |H ′′ | ≥ 2−4(log D)D            |H|,
while the claim on the branching structure is clear from the construction.                
3.5. Proof of Theorem 2.1.
Proof of Theorem 2.1. Let D ∈ N, ε > 0. In the course of the proof, we will impose
several lower bounds to D (depending on D0 , δ, q only) and upper bounds on ε (de-
pending on D, δ, q only), resulting in the verification of all the claims in the theorem.
To begin, we assume D ≥ D0 . In the course of the proof, we write m = Dℓ, and
understand ℓ and m to be sufficiently large that any claims involving them hold.
                                                                 2
  Let τ > 0 be the value given by Theorem 3.2 for κ := 2−2D −1 . We take
                                             τ
                                   ε≤                 .
                                        2 max(q, q ′)
(Later we will impose further conditions on ε.)
  Apply Lemma 3.3 to obtain sets A1 , B1 and j, j ′ ≤ 2εq ′ m satisfying (i)–(iii) in the
lemma (with A1 , B1 in place of A, B). By our choice of ε and Lemma 3.4,
                                  k1A1 ∗ 1B1 k22 ≥ 2−τ m |A1 ||B1 |2 ,
so that we can apply Theorem 3.2 to A1 , B1 to obtain an (m, κ)-small doubling set H
and a 2−m -set X such that
(3.4)                            |A1 ∩ (X + H)| ≥ 2−κm |A1 |,
(3.5)                                          |A1 | ≥ 2−κm |X||H|,
(3.6)                                    |B1 ∩ H| ≥ 2−κm |B1 |.
Thanks to Lemma 3.3, the sets A1 , B1 already satisfy (A-ii), (B-ii). As the final sets
A, B will be subsets of A1 , B1 , these properties are established.
  Our next step is to pass to suitable regular subsets of (a translation of) A1 , B1 , H:
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                  29
                                 2
    (1) By our choice κ = 2−2D −1 , we can apply Corollary 3.10 to H. Let H ′ ⊂ H be
        the resulting set, with branching numbers Rs , s ∈ [ℓ].
    (2) We first apply Lemma 3.8 (this is the point where we need to translate the
        original measure), and then Lemma 3.6 and (3.4) , to the set A1 ∩ (X + H), to
        obtain a set A ⊂ A1 ∩ (X + H) such that:
         (a) |A| ≥ 2−(2 log D/D)m |A1 ∩ (X + H)| ≥ 2−(3 log D/D)m |A1 |. Hence, in light of
             (A-ii), property (A-i) holds if D is taken large enough in terms of δ.
         (b) The set A is (ℓ, D, R′ )-uniform for some sequence (Rs′ )s∈[ℓ] . This shows
             that (A-iii) holds.
         (c) x ∈ 21 DsD (x) for all x ∈ A and s ∈ [ℓ]. That is, (A-iv) holds.
    (3) Similarly, we apply Lemma 3.8, and then Lemma 3.6 and (3.6), to B1 ∩ H to
        obtain a set B2 ⊂ B1 ∩ H (not yet our final set B) such that:
         (a) |B2 | ≥ 2−(2 log D/D)m |B1 ∩ H| ≥ 2−(3 log D/D)m |B1 |.
                                     e
         (b) The set B2 is (ℓ, D, R)-uniform     for some sequence (R   es )s∈[ℓ]. This shows
             that (B-iii) holds for B2 .
         (c) y ∈ 21 DsD (y) for all y ∈ B2 . As the final set B will be a subset of B2 , this
             establishes (B-iv).
  Next, we note that as A + H ′ ⊂ X + H + H, we can use (3.5) and (2)(a) above to
estimate
(3.7)     |A + H ′ | ≤ |X||H + H| ≤ 2κm |X||H| ≤ 22κm |A1 | ≤ 2(4 log D/D)m |A|.
Let S0 = {s ∈ [ℓ] : Rs = 1}, S1 = [ℓ] \ S0 , so that S1 indexes the scales over which H ′
has almost full branching. We will see that A has almost full branching for a large
subset of scales S ⊂ S1 ; eventually B will be obtained from B2 by collapsing all the
branching at the scales in [ℓ] \ S using Lemma 3.7.
   According to Lemma 3.9 applied to A and H ′ (which we have seen meet the hy-
potheses),
                                                        Y
(3.8)                       |A + H ′ | ≥ 2−(1/D)m |H ′|    Rs′ .
                                                       s∈S0
                Q            Q                        −1/4
Since |A| = s Rs′ , |H ′ | = s Rs and Rs ≥ 2(1−D )D for s ∈ S1 , we may combine
(3.7) and (3.8) to deduce that
          Y            |A|                                                 −1/4
              Rs′ = Q       ′
                              ≥ 2−(5 log D/D)m |H ′| ≥ 2−(5 log D/D)m 2(1−D )|S1 |D .
         s∈S1
                      s∈S0 Rs

Consider two cases.
  (1) If |S1 | < D −1/2 ℓ (which we note implies H ′ , hence H and B, are very small)
      we set S ′ = S1 and S = ∅.
  (2) If |S1 | ≥ D −1/2 ℓ, then we further deduce from the above that
                                 Y               −1/4
                                     Rs′ ≥ 2(1−2D )D|S1 | .
                                 s∈S1
30                                         PABLO SHMERKIN

         Let
                                                                     −1/8 )D
                                 S = {s ∈ S1 : Rs′ ≥ 2(1−D                     },
                                                              (1−D −1/8 )D
                                S ′ = {s ∈ S1 : Rs′ < 2                        }.
         Since Rs′ ≤ 2D for all s, we have
                                    X log R′
                                           s
              (1 − 2D −1/4 )|S1 | ≤          ≤ (1 − D −1/8 )|S ′ | + |S1 | − |S ′ |,
                                    s∈S
                                         D
                                         1

         so that
                             |S ′ | ≤ 2D −1/8 |S1 | ≤ 2D −1/8 ℓ.
We note for later reference that, in either case
(3.9)                       |S ′ | ≤ max(2D −1/8 ℓ, D −1/2 ℓ) = 2D −1/8 ℓ.
     We move on to the construction of B. By Theorem 3.2 and Corollary 3.10,
                                                                                       −1/4 )m
               |B2 + H ′ | ≤ |(B1 ∩ H) + H| ≤ 2κm |H| ≤ 2(5(log D)D                               |H ′|.
Applying Lemma 3.9 to B2 and H ′ , we deduce that
              Y
                   es ≤ 2(1/D)m 2(5(log D)D−1/4 )m ≤ 2(6(log D)D−1/4 )m .
                   R
                     s∈S0

We apply Lemma 3.7 to B2 and the set S0 , to obtain a new set B3 ⊂ B2 such that for
all s ∈ S0 and I ∈ DsD (B3 ), there is a single J ∈ D(s+1)D (B3 ∩ I), while if s ∈
                                                                                 / S0 , then
N (B3 ∩ I, (s + 1)D) = Res for all I ∈ DsD (B3 ). By Lemma 3.7 and (3)(a) above,
                                           −1/4 )m                             −1/4 )m
                    |B3 | ≥ 2−(6(log D)D              |B2 | ≥ 2−(7(log D)D               |B1 |.
Finally, recall that we defined a set S ′ , satisfying (3.9). We obtain our final set B by
applying Lemma 3.7 to B3 and S ′ . Then
                                             −1/8 m                  −1/8 m
                              |B| ≥ 2−2D              |B3 | ≥ 2−3D            |B1 |,
and N(s+1)D (I ∩ B) = 1 for all I = DsD (B) for each s ∈ S0 ∪ S ′ = [ℓ] \ S. We had
already established (B-ii) and (B-iv). The set B satisfies (B-i) if D is large enough
(thanks to (B-ii)); and it still satisfies (B-iii), with Rs′′ = 1 for s ∈              es for
                                                                        / S and Rs′′ = R
s ∈ S.
   The claim (v) follows from the construction if D is large enough: either s ∈ S,
in which case Rs′ ≥ 2(1−oD→∞ (1))(D) or s ∈   / S, in which case Rs′′ = 1 as we have just
observed.
   It remains to establish (vi). It follows from (B-i)–(B-ii) that ν(x) ≥ 21 2−δm |B|−1 for
all x ∈ B. On the other hand, we know from (B-iii) and (v) that |B| ≤ 2D|S| . We get
                                 ′                     ′                       ′
                            kνkq−q ≤ Oq (1)2δmq |B| ≤ Oq (1)2δmq 2D|S| ,
which gives the left-hand inequality in (vi), with Oq (δ) in place of δ.
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                           31

  By Lemma 3.3, µ(x) ≥ 12 2−2εq m kµkqq for all x ∈ A ⊂ A1 , whence
                                            ′              ′


                                                       ′           ′
                                         2−q 2−(2qq ε)m kµkqq         q
                                                           q |A| ≤ kµkq ,
                  ′              ′
so that |A| ≤ 23qq εm kµkq−q . Since |A| ≥ 2(1−δ)D|S| by (A-iii) and (v), the right-hand side
inequality in (vi) also follows (with 2δ in place of δ, say), concluding the proof.         

        4. P ROPERTIES OF DYNAMICALLY DRIVEN SELF - SIMILAR MEASURES
4.1. Preliminary lemmas. In this section we initiate the study of measures gener-
ated by pleasant models (recall Definition 1.9). We start by collecting some standard
lemmas for later reference. The short proofs are included for completeness.
Lemma 4.1. Let (Y, µ, B) be a probability space. Suppose P, Q are finite families of measur-
able subsets of Y such that each element of P can be covered by at most M elements of Q and
each element of Q intersects at most M elements of P. Then, for every q ≥ 1,
                                 X                 X
                                     µ(P )q ≤ M q      µ(Q)q
                                          P ∈P                         Q∈Q

Proof. Let QP,1 , . . . , QP,MP , MP ≤ M, be a minimal           Pmof Qq that covers
                                                  Pm sub-collection
                                                        q    q−1
P ∈ P. Using Hölder’s inequality in the form ( i=1 ai ) ≤ m        i=1 ai , we get

                      X                                MP
                                                      XX                            X
                          µ(P ) ≤ M  q          q−1
                                                                 µ(QPi )q ≤ M q           µ(Q)q .
                  P ∈P                                P ∈P i=1                      Q∈Q

                                                                                                    
                          Pℓ
Lemma 4.2. Let µ = i=1 µi , where µi are finitely supported measures on a space Y , such
that each point is in the support of at most M of the µi . Then
                                                                  ℓ
                                                                  X
                                            kµkqq ≤ M q−1               kµi kqq .
                                                                  i=1

Proof. For each x, Hölder’s inequality,
                                  P      together with
                                                     Pthe assumption      that µi (x) > 0
                                            q    q−1           q
for at most M values of i, gives ( i µi (x)) ≤ M       i µi (x) . The claim follows.   
Lemma 4.3. For any probability measures µ, ν on R/Z, and any q ∈ (1, ∞),
                                 k(µ ∗ ν)(m) kqq = Θq (1)kµ(m) ∗ ν (m) kqq .
Proof. Given I = [k2−m , (k + 1)2−m ) ∈ Dm , let PI = {(x, y) ∈ (R/Z)2 : x + y ∈ I} and
                    [
            QI =         [i2−m , (i + 1)2−m) × [(k − i)2−m , (k − i + 1)2−m ).
                      i∈Z/2m Z
                      P                                      P
Then k(µ ∗ ν)(m) kqq = I (µ ×ν)(PI )q and kµ(m) ∗ ν (m) kqq = I (µ ×ν)(QI )q , so the claim
follows from Lemma 4.1.                                                                   
32                                        PABLO SHMERKIN

4.2. A sub-multiplicative cocycle, and consequences. Throughout the rest of this
section, we use the following notation. We work with a measure-preserving sys-
tem (X, T, P), i.e. T : X → X is a measurable map, and TP = P. A model X =
(X, T, ∆, λ) is fixed, and µx , µx,n are as defined in (1.3), (1.4). Moreover, m = m(n)
will denote the smallest integer such that 2−m ≤ λn (the dependence is omitted when
it is clear from context). We assume that
(4.1)                          supp(µx ) ⊂ [0, 1] for all x ∈ X,
which can always be achieved by a change of coordinates, i.e. by replacing the map
∆ by g ◦ ∆ for an appropriate affine map g. Q
  For each x ∈ X we define
                       P∞ a code    space Ωx = ∞                  n
                                                    n=0 supp(∆(T x)) and a coding map
                                  n
πx : Ωx → R, via ωQ 7→ n=0   ωn λ . Then, by definition, µx is the push-down of the
                         n
product measure n ∆(T x) under this coding map. We also define the truncated
                                    Pn−1                                   Q
coding maps πx,n : Ωx → R, ω 7→ i=0       ωi λi . Then µx,n is the image of n ∆(Tn x)
under the truncated coding map.
                                    (m)                   (m)
Lemma 4.4. For every x ∈ X, kµx kqq = Θλ,q (1)kµx,n kqq .
              Q
Proof. Let η = ∞        n
               n=0 ∆(T x), so that µx = πx η and µn,x = πn,x η. Then
                                          X
                             kµx(m) kqq =    η(πx−1 I)q ,
                                               I∈Dm
                                               X
                                                         −1
                                    (m) q
                                  kµx,n kq =          η(πx,n I)q .
                                               I∈Dm
                           n              m
Since kπx −πx,n k∞ ≤ O(λ ) = Oλ (2 ), the lemma follows easily from Lemma 4.1.            
                                                            q
   We recall some well-known properties of the L spectrum τµ . See e.g. [33, Propo-
sition 3.2] for the proofs.
Lemma 4.5. For any probability measure on R of bounded support, the function τ = τµ :
[0, ∞) → R is increasing, concave, and satisfies τ (1) = 0.
   The next proposition introduces a sub-multiplicative cocycle (which was first used
in [35], in a special case) that will play a crucial rôle in the proof of Theorem 1.11. Let
us define the following sequence of functions, parametrized by q ∈ [1, ∞):
                                     φqn (x) = kµx(m(n)) kqq .
Proposition 4.6. For any n, n′ ∈ N,
                            φqn+n′ (x) ≤ Oq,λ (1)φqn (x)φqn′ (Tn x).
In particular, for each q ∈ [1, ∞) there exists a number T (q) such that
                                         1
(4.2)                             lim − log kµx(m) kqq = T (q)
                                 n→∞    m
for P-a.e. x. Moreover, for P-a.e. x it holds that T (q) = τµx (q) for all q ∈ [1, +∞). In
particular, T : [1, ∞) → R is increasing and concave, and T (1) = 0.
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                    33

Proof. We estimate:
                                                                              ′
                                                  ∗ (Sλn µTn x )(m(n+n )) kqq
                     ′                            ′
           kµx(m(n+n )) kqq ≤ Oλ,q (1)kµx,n
                                        (m(n+n ))
                                        X                                         ′
                            ≤ Oλ,q (1)          (m(n+n′ ))
                                             kµx,n         |I ∗ (Sλn µTn x )(m(n+n )) kqq
                                       I∈Dm(n)
                                        X                       X
                          ≤ Oλ,q (1)             µx,n (I)q                 µTn x (Sλ−n J)q
                                       I∈Dm(n)               J∈Dm(n+n′ )
                                                      (m(n′ )) q
                          ≤ Oλ,q (1)kµx(m(n)) kqq kµTnx       kq .
We have used the self-similarity relation (1.5) and Lemma 4.3 in the first line, Lemma
4.2 in the second line (which is justified since the support of Sλn µTn x has diameter
Oλ (2−m(n) )), Young’s inequality in the third line, and Lemmas 4.1, 4.4 in the last line.
   The subadditive ergodic theorem applied to the sequence of (bounded and mea-
surable) functions x 7→ log φqn (x) − Cλ,q for a sufficiently large constant Cλ,q yields
(4.2). More precisely, we know the convergence for the subsequence m(n), n ∈ N,
but since this sequence has positive density, (4.2) follows from the monotonicity of
m 7→ kν (m) kqq .
   Finally, if (qj ) is a dense subset of (1, ∞), then we know from the previous claim
that τµx (qj ) = T (qj ) for all j, for P-almost all x. Since τµ is concave and increasing,
and T (q) is clearly increasing, we deduce that the equality extends to all q ∈ (1, ∞).
   The last claim is immediate from Lemma 4.5                                            
   In order to prove Theorem 1.11, we would like to draw conclusions for all x rather
than almost all. Indeed, the strategy will be to prove that the convergence in (4.2)
holds for all x, and T (q) has the “expected” value. It is well known that for uniquely
ergodic systems, the ergodic averages of sufficiently regular (a.e. continuous) ob-
servables converge uniformly. The next known lemma asserts that a one-sided ver-
sion of this remains valid for subadditive cocycles.
Lemma 4.7. Let (X, T, P) be a uniquely ergodic measure-preserving system, with X a com-
pact metric space, and T continuous. Suppose φn : X → R are continuous P-almost every-
where and bounded, and
                               φn+n′ (x) ≤ φn (x) + φn′ (Tn x)
for all n, n′ ∈ N, x ∈ X. Then, denoting by L the P-almost sure limit of φn (x)/n, we have
                                 1
(4.3)                    lim sup φn (x) ≤ L uniformly in x ∈ X.
                           n→∞ n

Proof. For continuous φn , the claim was observed by Furman [18, Theorem 1]. In the
case the φn are only a.e. continuous and bounded, a classical exercise in measure
theory yields that for each n andR ε > 0 there exists a continuous function φn,ε such
that φn ≤ φn,ε pointwise, and φn,ε − φn dP ≤ ε. Indeed, using compactness and
the fact that P is a Radon measure, we may find a finite open cover (∪i Bi ) ∪ B ′ of
X such that the variation of φn on each Bi is at most ε/2, the discontinuity set of φn
34                                     PABLO SHMERKIN

is contained in B ′ , and P(B ′ ) < ε/(2kφn k∞ ). Let        ′
                                                    P(hi ), h be a continuous partition of
                              ′
unity subordinated to Bi , B , and define φn,ε = i hi kφn |Bi k∞ + h′ kφn k∞ .
   Other than the uniformity in x, the claim (4.3) follows from [22, Theorem 3.5],
which in turn is established by inspecting the proof of the subadditive ergodic theo-
rem given by Katznelson and Weiss [31] (recall that for uniquely ergodic systems all
points are generic). To deduce the uniform convergence, we recall that the ergodic
averages of the continuous functions φn,ε converge uniformly (thanks to unique er-
godicity), and apply [22, Eq.(18)].                                                     
  Furman [18, Theorem 1] also showed that, even in the continuous case, the set of x
such that fn (x)/n 6→ L may be nonempty and, indeed, can equal any Fσ , P-null set.
  From Proposition 4.6 and Lemma 4.7 we obtain the following crucial corollary;
this is the main place where the pleasantness of the model gets used.
Corollary 4.8. Suppose (X, T, ∆, λ) is a pleasant model. Then
                              1
                  lim inf −     log kµx(m) kqq ≥ T (q) uniformly in x ∈ X,
                   m→∞        m
where T (q) is the function from Proposition 4.6.
Proof. Let ψm : R/Z → [0, 1] be a continuous bump function supported on the inter-
val [−2−m , 2−m ] such that ψm ≡ 1 on [−2−m /2, 2−m /2]. It follows easily from Lemma
4.1 that
                          m −1 Z
                         2X                           q
                                            −m
               Ψm (x) :=          ψm (t + k2 )dµx (t) = Θq (kµx(m) kqq ).
                           k=0

Since the model is pleasant, Ψm is bounded and continuous P-a.e. The corollary is
now immediate from (the proof of) Proposition 4.6 and Lemma 4.7.               
   We point out that, in the special case given by Lemma 7.1 below, this corollary was
first obtained in [35].

4.3. Multifractal structure. Next, we investigate the scaling (or multifractal) prop-
erties of measures generated by pleasant models. Throughout the rest of this section,
we always assume the following:
  Standing assumption. (X, T, ∆, λ) is a pleasant model, T (q) is the function given
by Proposition 4.6 for this model. Any constants or parameters are allowed to de-
pend on the model (in particular, on the function T ).
  Later on, in §6.4, we will need small variants of the results of this section in which
T is replaced by the Lq spectrum of a fixed (non-homogeneous) self-similar measure.
With a view towards this, it may be useful to observe that the proofs only use the
concavity of T together with Corollary 4.8.
  We will establish some regularity of the multifractal structure for those values
of q such that T is differentiable at q. The Legendre transform plays a key role in
           FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                  35

multifractal analysis. Given a concave function τ : R → R, its Legendre transform
τ ∗ : R → [−∞, ∞) is defined as
                                         τ ∗ (α) = inf αq − τ (q).
                                                   q∈R

It is easy to check that if τ is concave and is differentiable at q, then
                                  τ ∗ (α) = αq − τ (q) for α = τ ′ (q).
  The next lemma is also well known; the short proof is included for completeness.
Lemma 4.9. If T is differentiable at q > 1, T (q) < q − 1, and α = T ′ (q), then T ∗ (α) ≤
α<1
Proof. Since T (1) = 0 and T (q) < q − 1, we have (T (q) − T (1))/(q − 1) < 1. On
the other hand, as T is concave and differentiable at q, we must have α ≤ (T (q) −
T (1))/(q − 1) < 1. Furthermore, T ∗ (α) ≤ α · 1 − T (1) = α, so the lemma follows. 
   It is known that the multifractal structure of general measures displays some reg-
ularity for values of q such that τµ is differentiable at q (or, dually, values of α such
that τ ∗ is strictly concave at α); see for example [33, Theorem 5.1]. The following
lemmas, which are proved with similar ideas, are a further illustration of this. For
a single measure µ, the heuristic to keep in mind is that, whenever α = τµ′ (q) exists,
                                                             ∗
almost all of the contribution to kµ(m) kqq comes from ≈ 2τ (α)m intervals, each of mass
≈ 2−αm . In our case, we are dealing with a family (µx )x∈X ; with the help of Corollary
4.8 we will establish results which are uniform in x, at the price of dealing with T (q)
in place of τµx (q).
Lemma 4.10. Suppose that α0 = T ′ (q0 ) exists for some q0 ∈ (1, ∞).
  Given ε > 0, the following holds if δ is small enough in terms of ε, q0 and m is large
enough in terms of ε, q0 and δ.
  Suppose D ′ ⊂ Dm is such that, for some x ∈ X:
       2−αm ≤ µx (I) ≤ 2 · 2−αm for all I ∈ D ′ and some α ≥ 0.
   (1) P
   (2) I∈D′ µx (I)q0 ≥ 2−(T (q0 )+δ)m .
                    ∗
Then |D ′ | ≤ 2m(T (α0 )+ε) .
Proof. Set η := ε/(3q0 ), and pick δ ≤ η 2 /9, and also small enough that, if q1 = q0 −δ 1/2 ,
then
(4.4)                              T (q0 ) − T (q1 ) ≤ δ 1/2 α0 + δ 1/2 η.
On one hand, using (1) and Corollary 4.8, we get
                                2−(T (q1 )−δ)m ≥ kµx(m) kqq11 ≥ |D ′ |2−αq1m ,
if m is large enough (depending on q0 , T , but not on x). On the other hand, by the
assumptions (1)–(2),
                         |D ′ |2−αq0m ≥ 2−q0 2(−T (q0 )−δ)m ≥ 2(−T (q0 )−2δ)m
36                                          PABLO SHMERKIN

if m ≫δ,q0 1. Eliminating |D ′| from the last two displayed equations yields
                    αq0 − T (q0 ) − 2δ ≤ α(q0 − δ 1/2 ) − T (q0 − δ 1/2 ) + δ,
so that, recalling (4.4),
                 δ 1/2 α ≤ T (q0 ) − T (q0 − δ 1/2 ) + 3δ ≤ δ 1/2 α0 + δ 1/2 η + 3δ.
Hence α − α0 < 2η, since we assumed δ ≤ (η/3)2 . Using this, a further application of
Corollary 4.8 guarantees that if m ≫ε 1, then
              2(−T (q0 )+ε/3)m ≥ kµx(m) kqq00 ≥ 2−q0 αm |D ′| ≥ 2−q0 α0 m 2−(q0 2η)m |D ′ |.
The conclusion follows from the formula T ∗ (α0 ) = q0 α0 − T (q0 ) and our choice η =
ε/(3q0).                                                                             
Lemma 4.11. Let q0 > 0 be such that α0 = T ′ (q0 ) exists. Given σ > 0, there is ε =
ε(σ, q0 ) > 0 such that the following holds for large enough m (in terms of σ, q0 ): for all
x ∈ X,
                X
(4.5)               {µx (I)q0 : I ∈ Dm , µx (I) ≥ 2−m(α0 −σ) } ≤ 2−m(T (q0 )+ε) .

Proof. Let η ∈ (0, 1) be small enough that
(4.6)                             T (q0 + η) ≥ T (q0 ) + ηα0 − δ,
where δ = ησ/(4 + 2q0 ).
  Let αj = α0 − δj, and write Nx (αj , m) for the number of intervals I in Dm such that
2−mαj ≤ µx (I) < 2−mαj+1 . By Corollary 4.8, for any fixed value of q, if m ≫q 1 then,
                          Nx (αj , m)2−mqαj ≤ kµx(m) kqq ≤ 2−m(T (q)−δ) .
Applying this to q = q0 + η, and using (4.6), we estimate
                            Nx (αj , m)2−mq0 αj ≤ 2mηαj 2−m(T (q0 +η)−δ)
                                                    ≤ 22δm 2−jδηm 2−T (q0 )m .
Let Sx be the sum in the left-hand side of (4.5) that we want to estimate. Using that
δ = ησ/(4 + 2q0 ), we conclude that
                                X
                        Sx ≤          Nx (αj , m)2−mq0 αj+1
                                    j:δ(j+1)≥σ
                                       X
                                ≤                2δq0 m 22δm 2−jδηm 2−T (q0 )m
                                    j:δ(j+1)≥σ
                                    X
                                ≤         2−jδηm 2(2+q0 )δm 2−ησm 2−T (q0 )m
                                    j≥0

                                ≤ Oδη (1)2(ησ/2−ησ)m 2−T (q0 )m ,
as claimed.                                                                                    
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                 37

Lemma 4.12. Let q0 > 1 be such that α0 = T ′ (q0 ) exists. Given κ > 0, there is ε =
ε(κ, q0 ) > 0 such that the following holds for large enough m (in terms of q0 , ε) and all
x ∈ X.
                        ∗
  If D ′ ⊂ Dm has ≤ 2(T (α0 )−κ)m elements, then
                                 X
                                     µx (I)q0 ≤ 2−(T (q0 )+ε)m
                                I∈D ′

for all x ∈ X.
Proof. Let σ = κ/(2q0 ) and fix x ∈ X. In light of Lemma 4.11, we only need to worry
about those I with µx (I) ≤ 2−m(α0 −σ) . But
          X                                                   ∗
             {µx (I)q0 : I ∈ D ′ , µx (I) ≤ 2−m(α0 −σ) } ≤ 2(T (α0 )−κ)m 2−(q0 α0 −q0 σ)m
                                                     = 2−(κ−q0 σ)m 2−T (q0 )m .
By our choice of σ, κ − q0 σ = κ/2 > 0, so this gives the claim.                          
  The second part of the following proposition can be used to give another (though
closely related) proof of Proposition 4.6, and was obtained in [40, 35] in special cases.
The first part is proved in a similar way, relying on Lemma 4.12.
Proposition 4.13. Let q > 1 be such that α = T ′ (q) exists.
   (i). Given κ > 0, there is η = η(κ, q) > 0 such that the following holds for all large
        enough m: for any s ∈ N, I ∈ Ds and x ∈ X, if D ′ is a collection of intervals in
                                 ∗
        Ds+m (I) with |D ′| ≤ 2(T (α)−κ)m , then
                             X
                                 µx (J)q ≤ 2−(T (q)+η)m µx (2I)q .
                            J∈D ′

  (ii). Given δ > 0, the following holds for all large enough m: for any I ∈ Ds , s ∈ N, and
        x ∈ X,                X
                                   µx (J)q ≤ 2−(T (q)−δ)m µx (2I)q .
                          J∈Ds+m (I)

Proof. We prove (i) first. Let n be the smallest integer such that λn < 2−s−2 . Let yj be
the atoms of µx,n such that [yj , yj + λn ] ∩ I 6= ∅, let pj be their respective masses, and
write                                          X
                                     µx,n,I =      pj δyj .
                                              j
Then the support of µx,n,I is contained in the λn -neighborhood of I. Moreover,
since δz ∗ Sλn µT n x is supported on [z, z + λn ], thanks to (4.1), it follows from the
self-similarity relation µx = µx,n ∗ Sλn µTnx and the definition of µx,n,I that µx |I =
(µx,n,I ∗ Sλn µTn x )|I . Write
                                                 X
                                p = kµx,n,I k1 =   pj ≤ µx (2I),
                                               j
38                                    PABLO SHMERKIN

using that, again by (4.1), the support of µx,n is contained in the λn neighborhood of
the support of µx , and that 4λn ≤ 2−s .
  We can then estimate
                                                                   !q
                    X             X X
                        µx (J)q =           pj δyj ∗ Sλn µTn x (J)
                   J∈D ′           J∈D ′           j
                                                                                      !q
                                   X           X
                               =                        pj µTn x (λ−n (J − yj ))
                                   J∈D ′           j
                                   X                   X
                                               q−1
                               ≤           p                    pj µTn x (λ−n (J − yj ))q
                                   J∈D ′                    j
                                           X                    X
                               = pq−1                  pj           µTn x (λ−n (J − yj ))q ,
                                               j            J∈D ′

where we used the convexity of tq in the third line. Now for each fixed j, each inter-
val λ−n (J − yj ) with J ∈ D ′ can be covered by Oλ (1) intervals in Dm , and reciprocally
each interval in Dm hits at most 2 intervals among the λ−n (J − yj ). We deduce from
Lemmas 4.1 and 4.12 that, still for a fixed j,
                       X
                           µTn x (λ−n (J − yj ))q ≤ Oλ,q (1)2−(T (q)+ε)m ,
                     J∈D ′

provided m is taken large enough, where ε = ε(κ, q) > 0 is given by Lemma 4.12.
Combining the last three displayed equations yields the first claim with η = ε/2.
  The second claim follows in the same way, adding over Ds+m (I) instead of D ′ , and
using Corollary 4.8 instead of Lemma 4.12.                                          

                             5. P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1.11
5.1. Flattening of Lq norm for dynamically driven self-similar measures. As noted
in the introduction, we aim to prove a generalization of [26, Theorem 1.1], by follow-
ing the same broad outline. One of the key steps in the proof of [26, Theorem 1.1]
consists in showing that convolving a self-similar measure with an arbitrary mea-
sure, on which only a lower bound on the entropy is assumed, results in an entropy
increment: see [26, Corollary 5.5]. In turn, this is derived from the inverse theorem of
[26] by proving that the entropy of self-similar measures is roughly constant at most
scales and locations, a property that Hochman termed uniform entropy dimension, see
[26, Definition 5.1 and Proposition 5.2] for precise details. Once again, we will follow
a different path to obtain a statement for Lq norms which is similar in spirit.
   We continue to work with a fixed pleasant model (X, T, ∆, λ), and the function T
from Proposition 4.6.
Theorem 5.1. Given σ > 0 and q > 1 such that T is differentiable at q and T (q) < q − 1,
there is ε = ε(σ, q) > 0 such that the following holds for m large enough in terms of all
previous parameters:
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                       39
                                     ′
  If ν is a 2−m -measure with kνkqq ≤ 2−σm , and x ∈ X, then

                                  kν ∗ µx(m) kqq ≤ 2−(T (q)+ε)m .

   The analogy with [26, Corollary 5.5] is clear. However, there is no useful analog of
the notion of uniform entropy dimension for Lq norms. One of the key differences
is that nearly all of the Lq norm may be (and often is) captured by sets of extremely
small measure; while sets of small measure also have small entropy. Instead, we will
use the regularity of the multifractal spectrum established in the previous section in
the following manner: if the flattening claimed in the theorem does not hold, then
the inverse theorem provides a regular set A which captures much of the Lq norm of
                                 ′
µx . The upper bound on kνkqq , together with (v)–(vi) in the inverse theorem imply
that A has nearly full branching for a positive proportion of 2D -scales, so it must have
substantially less than average branching also on a positive proportion of scales. On
the other hand, we will call upon the lemmas from the previous section to show that,
in fact, A must have nearly constant branching on nearly all scales (this is the part
that uses the differentiability of T at q), obtaining the desired contradiction.
                                                                     ′
Proof of Theorem 5.1. Suppose ν is a 2−m -measure with kνkqq ≤ 2−σm . In the course of
the proof, we will choose many numbers which ultimately depend on σ and q only.
To ensure that there is no circularity in their definitions, we indicate their dependen-
cies: α = α(q), κ = κ(α, σ), γ = γ(q, α, κ), δ ′ = δ ′ (α, σ, κ), η = η(q, κ), δ = δ(q, δ ′, γ, η),
ξ = ξ(q, δ ′, η, γ), D0 = D0 (q, σ, δ), D = D(q, δ, D0 ), ε = ε(q, δ, D0 ). Moreover, at dif-
ferent parts of the proof we will require δ ′ , δ, ξ to be smaller than certain (positive)
functions of the parameters they depend on; in particular, all of the requirements can
be satisfied simultaneously.
   Finally, m will be taken large enough in terms of all the previous parameters (hence
ultimately in terms of q and σ).
   Write α = T ′ (q), and define κ as

(5.1)                                    κ = (1 − T ∗ (α))σ/4.

Then κ > 0 thanks to Lemma 4.9, and the assumption T (q) < q − 1. (The reason for
this choice will become clear later.)
  We fix x ∈ X for the rest of the proof, and observe that all estimates will in fact
be independent of x. Let ξ > 0 be a small enough number to be chosen later. If
   (m)
kµx kqq ≤ 2−(T (q)+ξ)m then there is nothing to do, so from now on we assume that

(5.2)                               kµx(m) kqq ≥ 2−(T (q)+ξ)m .

  We apply Proposition 4.13 to obtain a sufficiently large D0 (in terms of δ, σ, q, with
δ yet to be specified) such that
40                                         PABLO SHMERKIN

     (1) For any D ′ ≥ D0 − 2, any I ∈ Ds′ , s′ ∈ N, and any subset D ′ ⊂ Ds′ +D′ (I) with
                    ∗       ′
         |D ′| ≤ 2(T (α)−κ)D ,
                               X                       ′
                                 µx (J)q ≤ 2−(T (q)+η)D µx (2I)q ,
                              J∈D ′

         where η depends on κ and q, hence on σ, q only.
     (2) For any D ′ ≥ D0 − 2 and any I ∈ Ds′ , s′ ∈ N,
                            X                           ′
                                  µx (J)q ≤ 2−(T (q)−δ)D µx (2I)q .
                          J∈Ds′ +D ′ (I)

   (3) 1/D0 < δ.
  Let ε > 0, D ∈ N be the numbers given by Theorem 2.1 applied to δ, D0 and q.
Suppose
(5.3)                             kν ∗ µx(m) kqq ≥ 2−(T (q)+εq/2)m
We will derive a contradiction from this provided m = ℓD is large enough, proving
the theorem with εq/2 in place of ε (if m is not of the form ℓD, we apply the argument
to ⌊m/D⌋D instead).
   By Corollary 4.8, if m is large enough (depending only on ε, q) and (5.3) holds, then
                                  kν ∗ µx(m) kq ≥ 2−εm kµx(m) kq .
                                                                                       (m)
We apply Theorem 2.1 to obtain (assuming m is large enough) a set A ⊂ supp(µx )
as in the theorem, with corresponding branching numbers Rs′ .
  The key to the proof is to show, using the structure of A provided by Theorem 2.1,
that
                                                    ∗
(5.4)                        |{s ∈ [ℓ] : Rs′ ≤ 2(T (α)−κ)D }| ≥ γℓ,
where γ > 0 depends on q, α and κ only (and κ is given by (5.1)). We first show how
to complete the proof assuming this. Consider the sequence
                                         X
                            Ls = − log         µx (I)q .
                                                I∈DsD (A)

By (2) applied with s′ = sD + 2 and D ′ = D − 2,
                                                               X
                    Ls+1 ≥ (T (q) − δ)(D − 2) − log                       µx (2I)q .
                                                            I∈DsD+2 (A)

But if I ∈ DsD+2 (A), then 2I is contained in a single interval in DsD (A) by property
(A-iv) from Theorem 2.1, and conversely J ∈ DsD (A) hits at most two intervals 2I,
I ∈ DsD+2 (A). We deduce that
                            Ls+1 ≥ Ls + (T (q) − δ)(D − 2) − 1
for all s ∈ [ℓ]. Likewise, by (1),
                            Ls+1 ≥ Ls + (T (q) + η)(D − 2) − 1,
         FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                41
                          ∗
whenever Rs′ ≤ 2(T (α)−κ)D . Recall that η depends on q, κ. In light of (5.4), and using
also (3), we have
                 Lℓ ≥ (T (q) + η)γℓ(D − 2) + (T (q) − δ)(1 − γ)ℓ(D − 2) − ℓ
                        ≥ (T (q) + ηγ − δ(1 − γ))m − 2δ(T (q) + η)m − δm.
  Hence, by choosing δ small enough in terms of T (q), γ and η we can ensure that,
for m large enough,
                              Lℓ = − log kµx(m) |A kqq ≥ (T (q) + ηγ/2)m.
On the other hand, by (A-i) in Theorem 2.1 and our assumption (5.2),
                           kµx(m) |A kqq ≥ 2−qδm kµx(m) kqq ≥ 2−qδm 2−(T (q)+ξ)m .
From the last two displayed equations,
                                             ηγ/2 ≤ qδ + ξ.
Recall that η = η(κ, q), γ = γ(q, α, κ) is yet to be specified, while δ so far was taken
small enough in terms of T (q), γ and η, and no conditions have been yet imposed on
ξ. By ensuring qδ < ηγ/8 and ξ ≤ ηγ/8 we reach a contradiction. Hence (5.3) cannot
hold, which is what we wanted to show.
   It remains to establish (5.4). The idea is very simple: Theorem 2.1 (together with
                           ′
the assumption that kνkqq ≤ 2−σm ) imply that A has “nearly full branching” on a
positive proportion of scales. On the other hand, Lemma 4.10 says the size of A is at
                  ∗
most roughly 2T (α)m ≪ 2m (by Lemma 4.9), so there must be a positive proportion
                                                                                 ∗
of scales on which the average 2D -adic branching is far smaller than 2T (α)D , which
is what (5.4) says.
   We proceed to the details. Using (A-i), (A-ii) in Theorem 2.1 and (5.2), we get that
                      e > 0 such that µx (a) ∈ [2−eαm , 21−eαm ] for all a ∈ A, and
(for m ≫δ 1) there is α
                    X                      X
                          µx (I)q ≥ 2−qδm       µx (I)q ≥ 2−(T (q)+qδ+ξ)m .
                        I∈Dm (A)                   I∈Dm

We let δ ≤ δ and ξ be small enough in terms of δ ′ and q that, invoking Lemma 4.10,
            ′

                                                      ∗      ′
(5.5)                                      |A| ≤ 2(T (α)+δ )m .
   Let S ′ = [ℓ] \ S, where S = {s : Rs′ ≥ 2(1−δ)D }. Using (A-iii) in Theorem 2.1, we see
that
                                    ℓ−1
                                    Y                    Y
(5.6)                        |A| =      Rs′ ≥ 2(1−δ)D|S|   Rs′ .
                                          s=0                    s∈S ′

Let m1 = D|S|, m2 = D|S ′ | = m − m1 . Combining (5.5) and (5.6), and using that
δ ≤ δ ′ , we deduce
               Y                     ∗     ′           ∗      ′       ∗     ′
(5.7)             Rs′ ≤ 2−(1−δ)m1 2(T (α)+δ )m ≤ 2−(1−T (α)−2δ )m1 2(T (α)+δ )m2 .
                s∈S ′
42                                       PABLO SHMERKIN

Note that 1 − T ∗ (α) > 0 by Lemma 4.9. At this point we take δ ′ small enough that
                                                                                     ′
1 − T ∗(α) − 2δ ′ > 0. Using (vi) in Theorem 2.1, and the assumptions (5.2) and kνkqq ≤
2−σm , we further estimate
(5.8)                 (σ − δ)m ≤ m1 ≤ ((T (q) + ξ)/(q − 1) + δ) m.
We can plug in the left inequality (together with m2 ≤ m) into (5.7), to obtain the key
estimate          Y
              log     Rs′ ≤ (T ∗ (α) + δ ′ − (1 − T ∗ (α) − 2δ ′ )(σ − δ)) m2 .
                   s∈S ′
Recalling (5.1), this shows that by making δ ′ (hence also δ ≤ δ ′ ) small enough in
terms of α, σ, κ, we have
                                Y
                            log    Rs′ ≤ (T ∗ (α) − 2κ)m2 .
                                 s∈S ′

Let S1 = {s ∈ S ′ : log Rs′ ≤ (T ∗ (α) − κ)D}. Recall that our goal is to show (5.4), i.e.
|S1 | ≥ γ(q, α, κ)ℓ. We have
                                   1      X             T ∗ (α) − 2κ
                                                    ′
                     ′
                 D|S \ S1 | ≤ ∗                log Rs ≤ ∗            D|S ′ |,
                             T (α) − κ                  T (α) − κ
                                           s∈S \S1
                                           ′


so that, using the right-most inequality in (5.8), and recalling that D|S ′ | = m − m1 ,
                                                                     
                       κ(m − m1 )      κ(1 − (T (q) + ξ)/(q − 1) − δ)
              D|S1 | ≥ ∗          ≥                                     m.
                        T (α) − κ                 T ∗ (α) − κ
By ensuring that δ, ξ are small enough in terms of q, the right-hand side above can
be bounded below by                                 
                              κ(1 − T (q)/(q − 1))/2
                                                       m,
                                    T ∗ (α) − κ
confirming that (5.4) holds with γ = γ(q, α, κ).                                  
5.2. Lq norms of µx,n at finer scales. Theorem 1.11 will be an easy consequence of the
following proposition, which relies on Theorem 5.1. It is an analog of [26, Theorem
1.4], and we follow a similar outline.
Proposition 5.2. Let (X, T, ∆, λ) be a pleasant model, and let T be the function from Propo-
sition 4.6. Let q ∈ (1, ∞) be such that T is differentiable at q and T (q) < q − 1, and let
x ∈ X be such that
                                     1
(5.9)                           lim    log kµx(m) kqq = −T (q).
                               m→∞ m

   Fix R ∈ N. Then
                                           (Rm(n)) q
                                    log kµx,n      kq
                                lim                    = T (q),
                               n→∞       n log λ
where m(n) is the smallest integer with 2−m(n) ≤ λn .
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                              43

Proof. Fix n ∈ N. We write m = m(n) for simplicity, and allow all implicit constants to
depend on q and the model only. Using the self-similarity relation (1.5) and Lemma
4.3, we get
         kµx((R+1)m) kqq ≤ O(1)kµx,n
                                 ((R+1)m)
                                          ∗ (Sλn µTn x )((R+1)m) kqq
                                 X                 ((R+1)m)                         q
                         = O(1)      µx,n (I)(µx,n)I         ∗ (Sλn µTn x )((R+1)m) q .
                                   I∈Dm

Here (µx,n )I = µx,n |I /µx,n (I) is the normalized restriction of µx,n to I (note that we
                                                                                         ((R+1)m)
are only summing over I such that µx,n (I) > 0). Since the measures (µx,n )I                      ∗
(Sλn µTn x )((R+1)m) are supported on I + [0, λn ], the support of each of them hits the
supports of O(1) others. We can then apply Lemma 4.2 to obtain
                                 X                      ((R+1)m)
          kµx((R+1)m) kqq ≤ O(1)      µx,n (I)q k(µx,n )I        ∗ (Sλn µTnx )((R+1)m) kqq
                                  I∈Dm

Let ρx,I = Sλ−n (µx,n )I (we suppress the dependence on n from the notation, but keep
it in mind). Note that Sa (η) ∗ Sa (η ′ ) = Sa (η ∗ η ′ ) for any a > 0 and measures η, η ′ . It
follows from Lemmas 4.1 and 4.3 that
                      ((R+1)m)                                           (Rm)            (Rm)
              k(µx,n)I           ∗ (Sλn µTn x )((R+1)m) kqq ≤ O(1)kρx,I           ∗ µTnx kqq ,
so that, combining the last two displayed formulas,
                                        X              (Rm)   (Rm)
(5.10)           kµx((R+1)m) kqq ≤ O(1)    µx,n (I)q kρx,I ∗ µTn x kqq .
                                             I∈Dm

On the other hand, using Lemma 4.1 again,
                       X                    ((R+1)m) q
                                                              X             (Rm)
          ((R+1)m) q
(5.11) kµx,n      kq =     µx,n (I)q k(µx,n)I       kq ≥ Ω(1)   µx,n (I)q kρx,I kqq .
                           I∈Dm                                             I∈Dm
                                                  (Rm)
  Fix σ > 0, and let D ′ = {I ∈ Dm : kρx,I kqq ≤ 2−σm }. According to Theorem 5.1,
there is ε = ε(σ, q) > 0 such that, if n is taken large enough, then
                                            (Rm)         (Rm)
                     I ∈ D′      =⇒       kρx,I    ∗ µTn (x) kqq ≤ 2−(T (q)+ε)Rm .
Applying this to (5.10), we get
                                              X                          X                      (Rm)
       kµx((R+1)m) kqq ≤ O(1)2−(T (q)+ε)Rm            µx,n (I)q + O(1)           µx,n (I)q kµTnx kqq
                                              I∈D ′                      I∈
                                                                          / D′
                                                                    (Rm)
                                                                                 X
                      ≤ O(1)2−(T (q)+ε)Rm kµx(m) kqq + O(1)kµTnx kqq                     µx,n (I)q
                                                                                 I/
                                                                                  ∈D ′



using Young’s inequality in the first line, and Lemma 4.4 in the second. On the other
hand, our assumption (5.9) implies that
                          2−(T (q)+ε)Rm kµx(m) kqq ≤ 2−εm/2 kµx((R+1)m) kqq
44                                     PABLO SHMERKIN

if n is large enough (depending on x and R). Inspecting the last two displayed equa-
tions, we deduce that if n ≫x,σ 1, then
                    X                             ((R+1)m) q
                                              kµx         kq
                                  q
                            µx,n (I) ≥ Ω(1)         (Rm) q
                                                             ≥ 2−m(T (q)+σ) ,
                    I/
                     ∈D ′                        kµTn x kq
where for the right-most inequality we used the assumption (5.9) and Corollary 4.8.
Recalling (5.11), we conclude that
                                   X             (Rm)
                 ((R+1)m) q
              kµx,n      kq ≥ Ω(1)   µx,n (I)q kρx,I kqq
                                      I/
                                       ∈D ′
                                              X
                              ≥ Ω(1)2−σm              µx,n (I)q ≥ Ω(1)2−2σm 2−mT (q) .
                                              I/
                                               ∈D ′

                  ((R+1)m) q     (m)
The inequality kµx,n      kq ≤ kµx,n kqq holds trivially, so that by Lemma 4.4
                              ((R+1)m) q     (m) q
                            kµx,n     kq ≤ kµx,n kq ≤ 2σm 2−mT (q) ,
provided n ≫σ 1. Since σ > 0 was arbitrary and 2−m = Θ(λn ), this concludes the
proof.                                                                       

5.3. Proof of Theorem 1.11. We can now conclude the proof of the theorem.
Proof of Theorem 1.11. We continue to write m = m(n) = ⌈n log(1/λ)⌉. To begin, we
note that, without any assumptions on the model, for any q ∈ (1, ∞),
                                                         n−1
                                                         Y
                               (m) q
(5.12)                       kµx,n kq ≥ kµx,n kqq ≥            k∆(Ti x)kqq .
                                                         i=0

(The latter inequality is an equality if and only if there are no overlaps among the
atoms of µx,n .) By our assumptions on the map ∆(·), the function x 7→ k∆(x)kqq is
bounded away from zero and continuous P-a.e. Then, by unique ergodicity,
                     n−1
                     Y                 Z
                1             i   q
(5.13)      lim log      k∆(T x)kq =       log k∆(x)kqq dP(x) uniformly in x ∈ X.
           n→∞ n                         X
                     i=0

This property of uniquely ergodic systems is well known, or one can apply Lemma
                                  Qn−1                                ′
4.7 to the additive sequence log i=0    k∆(Ti x)kqq . Since kν (m) kqq ≥ 2−m for any prob-
ability measure ν, from (5.12), (5.13) and Lemma 4.4, we deduce that
                                (m)         R                            
                          log kµx kqq          X
                                                 log k∆(x)kqq dP(x)
                lim sup −             ≤ min                             ,1 ,
                  m→∞      (q − 1)m                 (q − 1) log λ
uniformly in x ∈ X. In light of this and Corollary 4.8, the proof will be completed if
we can show that for each q ∈ (1, ∞), either T (q) ≥ q − 1 (so that in fact T (q) = q − 1)
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                  45

or
                                        R
                                        X
                                            log k∆(x)kqq dP(x)
(5.14)                        T (q) =                          .
                                                 log λ
Since T (q) is concave, it is enough to prove this for all q such that T is differentiable
at q. Hence, we fix q such that T (q) < q − 1 and T is differentiable at q, and we set
out to prove (5.14).
   By Proposition 4.6 and the exponential separation assumption, there is x ∈ X
such that (5.9) holds, and the atoms of µx,n are λRn -separated for infinitely many n
and some R ∈ N (indeed, this holds for P-almost all x). We known from Proposition
5.2 that
                                             (Rm(n))
                                    log kµx,n    kqq
(5.15)                          lim                  = T (q).
                               n→∞       n log λ
On the other hand, if n is such that the atoms of µx,n are λRn -separated then (since
λRn ≥ 2−Rm(n) )
                                                       n−1
                                                       Y
(5.16)                   kµ(Rm(n))
                           x,n     kqq = kµx,nkqq =          k∆(Ti x)kqq .
                                                       i=0

Combining Equations (5.13), (5.15) and (5.16), we conclude that (5.14) holds, finish-
ing the proof.                                                                     

         6. Lq DIMENSIONS OF SELF - SIMILAR MEASURES , AND APPLICATIONS
   In this section we apply Theorem 1.11 to prove Theorem 1.5; in fact, we will obtain
a far more general result for self-similar measures on the line. We also derive some
geometric applications.
6.1. Background on self-similar sets and measures. We begin by recalling some
basic facts about self-similar sets and measures, fixing notation along the way. For
further background, see e.g. [12].
   Let I be a finite set with at least two elements. Let (fi )i∈I be a collection of strictly
contracting similarities on Rd (usually referred to as an iterated function system or IFS).
That is, fi (x) = λi Oi (x) + ti , where λi ∈ (0, 1), Oi is an orthogonal map on Rd , and
ti ∈ Rd . Then there exists a unique nonempty compact set A ⊂ Rd such that
                                             [
                                        A=      fi (A).
                                             i∈I

If a probability vector (pi )i∈I is also given, then there is a unique Borel probability
measure µ such that                        X
                                       µ=      pi fi µ.
                                             i∈I
Moreover, supp(µ) ⊂ A, with equality if pi > 0 for all i.
46                                        PABLO SHMERKIN

    If one replaces I by I n , (fi ) by (fi1 ◦ · · · ◦ fin ), and (pi ) by (pi1 · · · pin ), then the
invariant set A and the invariant measure µ do not change.
    The Hausdorff and box counting dimensions agree for any self-similar set. The
open set condition holds if there is a nonempty open set U such that fi (U) ⊂ U and
fi (U) ∩ fj (U) = ∅ for all i 6= j ∈ I. P   In this case, the Hausdorff dimension of A is
the only positive number s such that i∈I λsi = 1. Moreover, the uniform self-similar
measure µ given by the weights λsi satisfies µ(B(x, r)) = Θ(r s ) for x ∈ A and r ∈ (0, 1],
with the implicit constants depending only on (fi ).
    In this article we will be mostly concerned with homogeneous iterated function sys-
tems: those for which λi ≡ λ and Oi ≡ O are constant for all i ∈ I. In this case, the
self-similar set A can be explicitly written as an infinite arithmetic sum:
                                           X ∞
                                      A=        Sλi (O i E),
                                                i=0

where E = {ti : i ∈ I} is the set of translations, and the self-similar measure µ can
be expressed as an infinite convolution:
                                                        i
                                         µ = ∗∞
                                              i=0 Sλi (O ∆),
              P
where ∆ =        i∈I pi δ(ti ). Note that in dimension 1 (where most of the focus will
be), O is either the identity or minus the identity, and the latter case can always be
reduced to the first by iterating the IFS, as above.
  If the system is homogeneous and the open set condition holds, then there is c > 0
such that for all n ∈ N, the points in the finite approximation
                                                n−1
                                                X
                                         An =         Sλi (O i E)
                                                i=0

are all distinct (i.e. there are |E| of them) and cλn separated. See e.g. [33, Example 1
                                     n

in Section 6]. Moreover, in this case the Lq dimensions of µ are given by
                                             log k∆kqq
                                    D(µ, q) =            .
                                           (q − 1) log λ
The right-hand side majorizes the Lq dimension without any separation assumption
(always assuming homogeneity).
   Finally, we point out that the limit in the definition of Lq dimension exists for
arbitrary self-similar measures, see [40].
6.2. Lq dimensions and Frostman exponents of self-similar measures. Next, we
obtain Theorem 1.5 as a P
                        special case of a result valid for more general self-similar
measures on R. Fix ∆ = i∈I pi δti ∈ A and λ ∈ (0, 1), and let
(6.1)                                 µ = µ∆,λ = ∗∞
                                                  i=0 Sλi ∆

be the associated self-similar measure. Bernoulli convolutions correspond to the spe-
cial case ∆ = 12 (δ−1 + δ1 ).
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                 47

Definition 6.1. Given a set E ⊂ R and n ∈ N, we let PE,n be the family of non-zero
polynomials of degree at most n and coefficients in E − E. Slightly abusing notation,
we write P∆,n = Psupp(∆),n .
  We say that a measure µ as in (6.1) has exponential separation if there exists R > 0
such that, for infinitely many n,
(6.2)                                 min |P (λ)| ≥ λRn .
                                     P ∈P∆,n

  Note that this is a property of supp(∆) and λ, and not of the particular distribution
of mass on supp(∆). Recall that if the open set condition holds, then there is c > 0
such that
                         |P (λ)| ≥ cλn for all n ∈ N, P ∈ P∆,n .
Hence, exponential separation is a weaker property than the open set condition.
Theorem 6.2. Let µ = µ∆,λ be a self-similar measure as in (6.1) with exponential separation.
Then for all q ∈ (1, +∞),
                                                           
                                              log k∆kqq
                          D(µ, q) = min                   ,1 .
                                            (q − 1) log λ
In particular, for every                                   
                                               log k∆k∞
                                  α < min                 ,1 ,
                                                   log λ
it holds that µ(B(x, r)) ≤ r α for all r ∈ (0, r0 (α)) and all x ∈ R.
  Before presenting the short deduction from Theorem 1.11, we make some remarks
on this statement:
    a) Theorem 1.5 is an immediate consequence of the last claim in the theorem.
    b) Recall from §6.1 that the claim in the theorem is well-known under the open
       set condition. The point is that the separation assumption is far weaker than
       the open set condition. This notion of “exponential separation” was intro-
       duced in [26] and, as explained there, it is a quantitative version of the “no
       exact overlaps” condition which is conjectured to already imply the claims in
       Theorem 6.2.
    c) As shown by Hochman [26], if λ and all points in supp(∆) are algebraic, then
       either (6.2) holds for all n, or λ is a root of some P ∈ P∆,n , n ∈ N (which
       corresponds to an exact overlap).
    d) Hochman ([26, Theorem 1.8], [27, Theorem 1.10]) has also shown that in quite
       general parametrized families of self-similar measures, the exponential sep-
       aration assumption in Theorem 6.2 holds outside of a set of parameters of
       packing and Hausdorff co-dimension at least 1.
    e) The analog of Theorem 6.2 for exact (or Hausdorff) dimension was estab-
       lished by Hochman [26, Theorem 1.1]. We recover his result in the homoge-
       neous case by letting q → 1+ in Theorem 6.2.
48                                   PABLO SHMERKIN

     f) Note that q 7→ − log k∆kqq is linear if and only if ∆ is uniform on its support;
        otherwise, it is a strictly concave real-analytic function. It follows from the
        theorem that, under the separation assumption (6.2), the map q 7→ τµ (q) is
        differentiable except, perhaps, at a single point q > 1 such that k∆kqq = λq−1 .
        It follows from a result of D-J. Feng [15] that the multifractal formalism holds
        for µ and all q ∈ (1, ∞) outside, possibly, of this point. See [15] for details.
Proof of Theorem 6.2. We apply Theorem 1.11 with a constant function ∆ (correspond-
ing to a one-point set X = {0}). Such a trivial model is clearly pleasant and satisfies
the continuity assumption in Theorem 1.11. The support of µn := µ0,n is
                       n−1
                                     ( n−1                     )
                       X              X
                           Sλi (∆) =       λi yi : yi ∈ supp(∆) ,
                        i=0             i=0

so the model has exponential separation if and only if µ has exponential separation.
The application of Theorem 1.11 is therefore justified, and yields the claimed formula
for Dµ (q). The latter claim for the Frostman exponent then follows from Lemma 1.7
by letting q ↑ ∞.                                                                   

6.3. Some applications. We present some consequences of Theorem 6.2. Recall that
the one-dimensional Sierpiński Gasket S is the set of all points in [0, 1]2 of the form
                    (∞                                          )
                      X
                          Xn 3−n : Xn ∈ {(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0)} .
                         n=1

The gasket S is a self-similar set, with open set condition, of Hausdorff dimension
1. Furstenberg conjectured that all orthogonal projections of S in directions with
irrational slope also have Hausdorff dimension 1; this was proved in [26, Theorem
1.6]. We can deduce a stronger statement from Theorem 6.2:
Corollary 6.3. Let Πt (x, y) = x + ty. For every Borel subset A ⊂ S and for every t ∈ R \ Q,
                                 dimH (Πt A) = dimH (A).
Proof. Let µ be the uniform self-similar measure on S, so that µ(B(x, r)) = Θ(r) for
x ∈ S and r ≤ 1. For each t ∈ R, the projection Πt µ is the uniform self-similar
measure for the iterated function system {x/3, x/3 + 1, x/3 + t}. As shown in the
proof of [26, Theorem 1.6], this IFS satisfies the exponential separation hypothesis
(6.2) for all irrational t. From now on let t be a fixed irrational number. We deduce
from Theorem 6.2 that
                        Πt µ(B(y, ε)) = Ot,δ (ε1−δ ) for all δ > 0.
In turn, Lemma 1.8 says that Πt−1 (B(y, ε)) can be covered by Ot,δ (ε−δ ) balls of radius
ε for any y ∈ R. Indeed, if (xj )j is a maximal ε-separated subset of some set, then
(B(xj , ε))j covers the set.
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                        49

  Now fix a Borel subset A ⊂ S of Hausdorff dimension s, and δ > 0. By Frostman’s
Lemma (see e.g. [34, Theorem 8.8]) there is a Borel probability measure ν supported
on A such that ν(B(x, ε)) = OA,δ (εs−δ ) for all x ∈ R2 , ε > 0. It follows that
                                 Πt ν(B(y, ε)) = OA,δ,t(εs−2δ ).
Since δ > 0 was arbitrary, the conclusion follows from the mass distribution principle
(see e.g. [12, Proposition 2.1]).                                                   
   The gasket S could be replaced by the attractor of any iterated function system in
the plane, satisfying the open set condition and of Hausdorff dimension at most 1, of
the form (λx+ ai , λy + bi )i∈I with λ, ai , bi all rational. If λ, ai , bi are only assumed to be
algebraic, then the same holds assuming that t is transcendental, instead of irrational.
The proof works verbatim since in this more general situation Πt S continues to be a
self-similar set satisfying (6.2), see the proof of [44, Theorem 5.3].
   When the Hausdorff dimension of the self-similar set is larger than 1 we cannot
reach the same conclusion, but Lemma 1.8 still provides an upper bound for the
size of the fibers. We conclude this section by discussing some concrete classes of
examples.
Corollary 6.4. Let A ⊂ [0, 1) be a p-Cantor set, p ≥ 2. Then for every irrational number
t ∈ R and any u ∈ R,
                       dimB (A ∩ (tA + u)) ≤ max(2 dimH (A) − 1, 0).
Proof. The product set S = A × A is the attractor of an iterated function system
with rational coefficients satisfying the open set condition, and dimH (S) = 2 dimH A.
As pointed out above, it is shown in the proof of [44, Theorem 5.3] that Πt S is a
self-similar set satisfying (6.2) whenever t is irrational (the argument for this holds
regardless of the dimension of the self-similar set). Since the fiber Π−1
                                                                       t (u) ∩ S is, up
to an affine change of coordinates, equal to A ∩ (tA + u), the conclusion follows from
Theorem 6.2 and Lemma 1.8.                                                            
  The corollary generalizes to Tp -invariant sets, by embedding them in p-Cantor sets
of arbitrarily close dimension, see the proof of Theorem 1.2 in §7.1 below. The di-
mension of the intersections of the middle-thirds Cantor set with translates of itself
(without scaling) was investigated by Hawkes [23], and this was greatly generalized
to Tp -invariant sets by Kenyon and Peres [32]. Without scaling, the situation is very
different; in particular, dimH (A ∩ A + u) > 2 dimH (A) − 1 for many values of u. We
mention also a related result of M. Hochman [24] for invariant measures: if µ is Tp -
invariant, dimH µ ∈ (0, 1) and f (x) = tx + u with log t/ log p ∈    / Q, then µ and f µ are
mutually singular.
  Likewise, if S is the standard Sierpiński gasket or the Sierpiński carpet, or more
generally if S is the attractor of an IFS of the form (N −1 (x + ai , y + bi ))i∈I with (ai , bi ) ∈
[N]2 , and |I| > N (so that dimH S > 1), then
                                 dimB (S ∩ ℓ) ≤ dimH (S) − 1
50                                     PABLO SHMERKIN

for all lines ℓ with irrational slope. The intersections of these carpets with lines of
rational slope was investigated in several papers; see [3, 4] and references there. In
particular, in those two papers it is shown that for the gasket and many other car-
pets S, there are many lines with a given rational slope that intersect S in a set of
dimension > dimH (S) − 1. More precisely, given a rational slope, a typical slice (with
respect to the uniform self-similar measure) has a constant dimension strictly larger
than dimH (S) − 1.
6.4. General self-similar measures on the line. We conclude this section by extend-
ing Theorem 6.2 to general (not necessarily homogeneous) self-similar measures on
R. Although we are no longer in a setting in which Theorem 1.11 can be applied,
we will see that the same approach, with minor changes, can be used to directly
establish the desired result.
  We begin by defining a notion of exponential separation, which again agrees with
that in [26], and extends the one given here in the homogeneous case. We define a
distance between two affine maps gi (x) = λi x + ti on R as
                                       
                                         |t1 − t2 | if λ1 = λ2
                         d(g1 , g2 ) =                          .
                                             1      if λ1 6= λ2
   Let (fi )i∈I be strictly contractive, invertible affine maps on R, i.e. fi (x) = λi (x) + ti ,
where |λi | ∈ (0, 1) and ti ∈ R. Given a finite word u ∈ I k , we write fu = fu1 · · · fuk ,
fu (x) = λu x + tu , and pu = pu1 · · · puk . If k ≥ 1, we also write u− for the word obtained
from u by deleting the last symbol.
   Given m ∈ N, let Ωm be the family of all words u such that λu ≤ 2−m but λu− > 2−m .
We can now define:
Definition 6.5. We say that the IFS (fi )i∈I has exponential separation if there are R > 0
and a sequence mj → ∞ such that
                          d(fu , fv ) ≥ 2−Rmj     for all u 6= v ∈ Ωmj .
Theorem 6.6. Let (fi )i∈I be an IFS with exponential separation, and consider a self-similar
measure                                   X
                                     µ=      pi fi µ.
                                                i∈I
                                                                             P      q       −e
                                                                                             τ (q)
                   τ (q)/(q − 1), 1), where τe(q) is the only solution to
Then D(µ, q) = min(e                                                           i∈I pi |λi |        =
1.
  As many of the steps in the proof of Theorem 6.6 are small variants of correspond-
ing steps in the proof of Theorem 1.11, we will present an outline emphasizing the
main differences, and leave the verification of the details to the interested reader. For
simplicity we will assume that λi > 0 for all i; the general case can be deduced with
minor notational changes.
  Let τ (q) = τ (µ, q). We have to show that either τ (q) = q − 1 or τ (q) = τe(q). Hence,
in order to prove Theorem 6.6 it is enough to establish:
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                 51

Proposition 6.7. Under the assumptions of Theorem 6.6, if q ∈ (1, ∞) is such that τ (q) <
q − 1, then τ (q) = τe(q).
   To prove the proposition, we begin by observing that Lemmas 4.9–4.12 hold if
T (q) if replaced by τ (q) and µx by µ. Indeed, the proofs only use concavity of T ,
and Corollary 4.8, both of which remain true for τ and µ by the definition and basic
properties of τ (since we are dealing with just one measure, one needs not worry
about uniform convergence in this context).
   As a consequence, Proposition 4.13 also remains valid with τ in place of T and µ
in place of µx . Indeed, given m ∈ N, we define
                                        X
                                  µm =       pu δ(tu ).
                                          u∈Ωm

We note that this does not fully agree with our earlier notation in the homogeneous
case. Given s ∈ N and I ∈ Ds , we let yj be the atoms of µs+2 such that [yj , yj + 2−s−2] ∩
I 6= ∅, let pj be their masses, and define
                                           X
                                     µI =     pj δyj .
                                             j

The proof of Proposition 4.13 then goes through using the measures µI instead of
µx,n,I .
  In turn, Theorem 5.1 remains valid if, once again, we replace T (q) by τ (q) and µx
by the fixed self-similar measure µ. This is because the proof of Theorem 5.1 relies
only on Corollary 4.8, Lemmas 4.9 and 4.10, and Proposition 4.13, all of which we
have seen continue to hold in our context.
  The main change comes in the proof of the analog of Proposition 5.2, which nev-
ertheless remains valid:
Proposition 6.8. Using the notation above, fix q ∈ (1, ∞) such that τ is differentiable at q
and τ (q) < q − 1. Then, for any R ∈ N
                                           (Rm)
                                    log kµm kqq
                               lim                  = −τ (q)
                              m→∞         m
Proof. The key difference with the setting of Proposition 5.2 is that µ is no longer a
convolution of a scaled down version of itself and a discrete approximation. How-
ever, µ is still a convex combination of a “small” number of measures which do
have this structure. Indeed, given m ∈ N, let Λm be the set of contraction ratios
{λu : u ∈ Ωm }. For λ ∈ Λm , define
                                 X
                        µm,λ =      {pu δ(tu ) : u ∈ Ωm , λu = λ}.
Note that µm,λ is positive and
                            Q finite but does not have mass 1 in general. The ele-
ments of Λm are of the form i∈I λni i , where λni i ≥ (mini∈I λi )2−m . It follows that
(6.3)                                |Λm | ≤ O(m|I|),
52                                        PABLO SHMERKIN

with the implicit constant depending only on |I| and (λi )i∈I . By self-similarity we
have
                             X             X
(6.4)                    µ=      pu fu µ =    µm,λ ∗ Sλ µ,
                                   u∈Ωm               λ∈Λm


The idea is to apply the argument of the proof of Proposition 5.2 to the convolutions
µm,λ ∗ Sλ µ. Since, thanks to (6.3) and (6.4), µ is the sum of a sub-exponential number
of such measures, theP  proof will go through with minor P changes.
  Recall that µm =       u∈Ωm pu δ(tu ), so that µm P=     λ∈Λm µm,λ . Note also that, by
the self-similarity identity (6.4), we have µ = u∈Ωm pu (δ(tu ) ∗ Sλu µ). Since Sλu µ is
supported on an interval [−Θ(2−m ), Θ(2−m)], an application of Lemma 4.1 yields
                                      (m) q
(6.5)                               kµm  kq = Θq (1)kµ(m) kqq .
                                       P          q
                                                                  P
Using (6.4), the Hölder bound k          j∈Λ νj kq    ≤ |Λ|q−1              q
                                                                    j∈Λ kνj kq and Lemma 4.3, we
get
                                                   X       ((R+1)m)
               kµ((R+1)m) kqq ≤ O(1)|Λm|q−1             kµm,λ         ∗ Sλ µ((R+1)m) kqq .
                                                λ∈Λm

Let µm,λ,I be the normalized restriction of µm,λ to I. Note that, for fixed λ ∈ Λm , the
                       ((R+1)m)
family of supports of µm,λ,I    ∗ (Sλ µ)((R+1)m) has covering number O(1). Using this
together with Lemma 4.2, we deduce that
                                        X X                       ((R+1)m)
        kµ((R+1)m) kqq ≤ O(1)|Λm|q−1                  µm,λ (I)q kµm,λ,I      ∗ (Sλ µ)((R+1)m) kqq .
                                       λ∈Λm I∈Dm


Let ρm,λ,I = S1/λ (µm,λ,I ). Using that λ = Θ(2−m ) for λ ∈ Λm together with Lemmas
4.1 and 4.3, we see that for each λ ∈ Λm and I ∈ Dm we have
                     ((R+1)m)                                     (Rm)
                  kµm,λ,I       ∗ (Sλ µ)((R+1)m) kqq = Oq (1)kρm,λ,I ∗ µ(Rm) kqq .

We deduce from the last two displayed equations that there is λ∗ = λ∗ (m) ∈ Λm such
that
                                        X              (Rm)
             kµ((R+1)m) kqq ≤ O(1)|Λm|q   µm,λ∗ (I)q kρm,λ∗ ,I ∗ µ(Rm) kqq .
                                               I∈Dm

                                            (Rm)
Fix σ > 0, and let D ′ = {I ∈ Dm : kρm,λ∗ ,I kqq ≤ 2−σm }. By the analog of Theorem 5.1
in our context, there exists ε = ε(σ, q) ∈ (0, σ) such that (for m large enough)
                                        (Rm)
                      I ∈ D ′ =⇒ kρm,λ∗ ,I ∗ µ(Rm) kqq ≤ 2−εm kµ(Rm) kqq .
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                          53

Combining the last two displayed equations with the bound O(1)|Λm|q ≤ 2−εm/2
valid for m ≫q,ε 1, we get
                                           X                               X
    kµ((R+1)m) kqq ≤ 2εm/2 2−εm kµ(Rm) kqq   µµ,λ∗ (I)q + 2εm/2 kµ(Rm) kqq   µm,λ∗ (I)q
                                                  I∈D ′                                 I/
                                                                                         ∈D ′
                                                                                           !
                                                                      X
                     ≤ kµ(Rm) kqq     2εm/2 2−εm kµ(m) kqq + 2εm/2            µm,λ∗ (I)q       .
                                                                      I/
                                                                       ∈D ′

Since − m1 log kµ(m) kqq converges (to τ (q)), we know that
                         2εm/2 2−εm kµ(Rm) kqq kµ(m) kqq ≤ 21 kµ((R+1)m) kqq
for large enough m, and therefore (using ε < σ)
             X
               µm,λ∗ (I)q ≥ 12 2−εm/2 kµ(Rm) k−q
                                              q kµ
                                                   ((R+1)m) q
                                                           kq ≥ 2−σm 2−τ (q)m .
             I/
              ∈D ′

On the other hand, similarly to (5.11), we can apply the pointwise inequality µm ≥
µm,λ∗ and then Lemma 4.1 to conclude (always assuming m is large enough)
                               ((R+1)m) q
                                                 X               (Rm)
             kµm((R+1)m) q
                        kq ≥ kµm,λ∗    kq ≥ Ω(1)    µm,λ∗ (I)q kρm,λ∗ ,I kqq
                                                              I∈Dm
                                    X
                               ≥            µm,λ∗ (I)q 2−σm ≥ 2−(τ (q)+2σ)m .
                                    I/
                                     ∈D ′

The opposite inequality
                       ((R+1)m) q     (m) q
                     kµm       kq ≤ kµm  kq ≤ O(1)kµmkqq ≤ 2−(τ (q)−σ)m
holds for large enough m by (6.5) so, since σ > 0 was arbitrary, this concludes the
proof.                                                                           
Proof of Proposition 6.7. It is enough to prove the statement for q such that τ is differ-
entiable at q. Iterating the definition of τe(q), we see that
                                     X
                                          pqu λu−eτ (q) = 1.
                                             u∈Ωm
                −m     −m
Since λu ∈ (c2 , 2          ) for u ∈ Ωm and a constant c > 0 depending only on the IFS,
we deduce that
                                                            P       q
                                                                        
                                                    − log     u∈Ωm pu
(6.6)                           τe(q) = lim                    .
                                              m→∞    m
   By the exponential separation assumption, there exist R ∈ N and a sequence mj →
∞ such that, for fixed λ ∈ Λmj , the distance between any two distinct atoms of µm,λ
is at least 2−Rmj . Hence, by (6.4) and Hölder’s inequality,
                                           X    (Rm) q
                                                                      X
(6.7)           kµ(Rm
                    mj
                       j) q
                         k q ≤ |Λ mj
                                     | q−1
                                             kµ      k
                                                mj ,λ q = |Λ mj
                                                                | q−1
                                                                        pqu .
                                               λ∈Λmj                            u∈Ωmj
54                                       PABLO SHMERKIN

On the other hand, one always has
                                                           X
(6.8)                            kµ(Rm)
                                   m    kqq ≥ kµm kqq ≥          pqu .
                                                          u∈Ωm

   Combining Proposition 6.8 and Equations (6.3), (6.6), (6.7) and (6.8) yields the
claimed equality τ (q) = τe(q).                                                   
     This concludes the proof of Theorem 6.6.

7. C ONVOLUTIONS OF SELF - SIMILAR MEASURES AND THE PROOF OF T HEOREM 1.2
7.1. Convolutions of two self-similar measures and Furstenberg’s conjectures. We
turn to convolutions of homogeneous self-similar measures, and deduce Theorem
1.2 as a corollary. As we observed in §1.4, the convolutions of the natural measures
on a p-Cantor set and a q-Cantor set fit naturally into the setting of dynamically
driven self-similar measures. The same argument works in greater generality:
Lemma 7.1. Let 0 < λ2 < λ1 < 1 and ∆1 , ∆2 ∈ A, and consider the self-similar measures
(7.1)                             ηi = ηi (∆i , λi ) = ∗∞
                                                        n=0 Sλn
                                                              i
                                                                ∆i .
     Write ai = | log(λi )|. On X = [0, a2 ), define the map
                                    T(x) = x + a1 mod (a2 ).
Moreover, let ∆ : X → A be given by
                               
                                  ∆1 ∗ Sex ∆2 if x ∈ [0, a1 )
                       ∆(x) =                                   .
                                  ∆1          if x ∈ [a1 , a2 )
Then if µx is given by (1.3) with λ = λ1 , we have
                                
                                   η1 ∗ Sex η2     if x ∈ [0, a1 )
                           µx =                                     .
                                   η1 ∗ Sex−a2 η2 if x ∈ [a1 , a2 )
for all x ∈ X.
Proof. Let n′ (x) = |{i ∈ [1, n] : Ti (x) ∈ [0, a1 )}|. Then Tn (x) = x + na1 − n′ (x)a2 , so
       n              n′ (x)
that eT (x) λn1 = ex λ2 , and therefore
                                                         ′          
                                                             n (x)
(7.2)                 ∗ni=1 ∆(Ti x) = ∗ni=1 Sλi1 ∆1 ∗ Sex ∗i=1 Sλi 2 ∆2 .
The claim follows by convolving with ∆(x) to get µn+1,x , and then letting n → ∞. 
Theorem 7.2. Let η1 , η2 be as in (7.1). Assume log λ2 / log λ1 ∈
                                                                / Q. Moreover, suppose that
there is R > 0 such that for infinitely many n and all Pj ∈ P∆j ,n (recall Definition 6.1),
j = 1, 2 it holds that
                                 |P1 (λ1 )|, |P2(λ2 )| ≥ λRn
                                                          1 .
Then
(7.3)                     D(η1 ∗ η2 , q) = min (D(η1 , q) + D(η2 , q), 1)
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                                55

for all q ∈ (1, ∞).
Proof. Let (X, T, ∆, λ1 ) be the model given by Lemma 7.1. We identify X with the
circle (i.e. we identify 0 and log λ1 ), so that the X becomes compact, and T is rota-
tion by log λ1 / log λ2 (which is irrational by assumption) on the circle. Hence T is
uniquely ergodic (with the unique invariant measure P being normalized Lebesgue
measure on X). If ∆1 and ∆2 are supported on a single point, then µx is an atom for
all x and there is nothing to do; otherwise, µx is non-atomic for all x. Finally, the map
x 7→ µx has a single discontinuity at a1 , as is evident from Lemma 7.1. We have then
checked that the model is pleasant. The assumptions on x 7→ ∆(x) in Theorem 1.11
also hold trivially.
   We claim that our assumption on the separation of η1 , η2 implies that our model
has exponential separation. Let
                              n−1
                                               ( n−1                 )
                              X                 X
                       ∆n,j =     Sλij (∆j ) =       yi λij : yi ∈ ∆j .
                                  i=0                 i=0

Recall from (7.2) that all atoms of µx,n have the form
                              {u1 + ex u2 : u1 ∈ ∆n,1 , u2 ∈ ∆n,2 }.
Thus, for given x ∈ X, the smallest distance between atoms of µx,n is bounded above
by
    Φn (x) = min{|P1 (λ1 )|, |ex P2 (λ2 )|, |P1 (λ1 ) − ex P2 (λ2 )| : P1 ∈ P∆1 ,n , P2 ∈ P∆2 ,n }.
Here |P1 (λ1 )| corresponds to differences between pairs of atoms for which u2 coin-
cide, |ex P2 (λ2 )| to pairs of atoms for which u1 coincide, and |P1 (λ1 ) − ex P2 (λ2 )| to
pairs of atoms for which neither u1 nor u2 coincide. By assumption, |Pj (λj )| ≥ λRn      1
for infinitely many n, so we only have to deal with the third type of differences. Fix,
then, n such that |Pj (λj )| ≥ λRn1 for all Pj ∈ P∆j ,n .
  Let R′ ≫ R. For fixed Pj ∈ P∆j ,n ,
                                                      ′                    (R′ −R)n
                  |{x : |P1 (λ1 ) − ex P2 (λ2 )| ≤ λR n
                                                    1 }| ≤ O∆1 ,∆2 (1)λ1              .
Since |P∆j ,n | ≤ O|∆j | (1)n , we deduce that
                                         ′                                                (R′ −R)n
     |{x : |P1 (λ1 ) − ex P2 (λ2 )| ≤ λR
                                       1
                                         n
                                           for some Pj ∈ P∆j ,n }| ≤ O∆1 ,∆2 (1)n λ1                 .
Hence, if R′ is taken large enough (in terms of R, ∆1 , ∆2 only), then there are infin-
                                                                                          ′n
itely many n ∈ N such that for almost all x ∈ X it holds that |P1 (λ1 )−ex P2 (λ2 )| ≥ λR
                                                                                        1
for any choice of Pj ∈ P∆j ,n . This establishes exponential separation.
   We have verified that the application of Theorem 1.11 is justified. In light of this
theorem, we only need to check that the right-hand side in (7.3) equals the right-hand
side in (1.6). Note that
                              k∆1 ∗ Sex ∆2 kqq = k∆1 kqq k∆2 kqq
56                                     PABLO SHMERKIN

outside of a finite set of x. Hence, keeping in mind the definition of the map ∆ from
Lemma 7.1,
                 Z
                                                        log(λ1 )
                     log k∆(x)kqq dP(x) = log k∆1 kqq +           log k∆2 kqq .
                   X                                    log(λ 2 )
Dividing by (q − 1) log(λ1 ) we get that
                                                                       
                                       log k∆1 kqq      log k∆2 kqq
             D(η1 ∗ η2 , q) = min                   +                 ,1 .
                                    (q − 1) log(λ1 ) (q − 1) log(λ2 )
Theorem 6.2 applied to η1 and η2 concludes the proof.                                        
  We point out that in the range q ∈ (1, 2], the above result was proved in [35] in
some special cases and then, extending the same ideas, in [22, Corollary 6.2], in even
greater generality. For example, in [22] no separation assumptions are made on η1 , η2 .
However, the methods of [35, 22] ultimately rely on Marstrand’s projection theorem,
which is known to fail in general if q > 2.
  As a corollary, we obtain a Furstenberg-like bound on the intersections of self-
similar sets, which also answers affirmatively a question of De-Jun Feng.
Corollary 7.3. Let λ1 , λ2 ∈ (0, 1) with log λ1 / log λ2 ∈/ Q. Suppose E1 , E2 are finite sets
such that {λj x + t : t ∈ Ej } satisfies the open set condition for j = 1, 2. Let A1 , A2 denote
the corresponding self-similar sets.
  Then for all invertible affine maps g : R → R,
                 dimB (A1 ∩ g(A2 )) ≤ max(dimH (A1 ) + dimH (A2 ) − 1, 0).
Proof. Let ηi be the uniform self-similar measure on Ai , and write µ = η1 × η2 and
s = dimH (A1 ) + dimH (A2 ). Then µ(B(x, r)) = Θ(r s ) for x ∈ supp(µ), since the corre-
sponding fact holds for η1 , η2 thanks to the open set condition.
   As rescaling A2 does not change the assumptions, it is enough to prove the claim
when g is a translation. Let ∆j be the uniform probability measure on Ej , and ηj =
ηj (λj , ∆j ) the associated self-similar measure. The hypotheses of Theorem 7.2 are
met, so we know that
                                                                 
                                         log |E1 |   log |E2 |
                 D(η1 ∗ η2 , q) = min              +           , 1 = min(s, 1)
                                        log(1/λ1 ) log(1/λ2)
for all q > 1. The claim now follows from Lemmas 1.7 and 1.8 applied to the function
(x, y) 7→ x − y restricted to A1 × A2 .                                            
     We can now finish the proof of Theorem 1.2.
Proof of Theorem 1.2. Let A, B be Tp -invariant and Tq -invariant respectively, with p
and q multiplicatively independent, and fix δ > 0. Given N ∈ N, let
                      EA,N = {jp−N : A ∩ [jp−N , (j + 1)p−N ) 6= ∅},
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                57

and define EB,N likewise. It is well known that Hausdorff and box-counting dimen-
sions coincide for Tp , Tq -invariant sets, see e.g. [21, Theorem 5.1] for a more general
fact. Hence by taking N large enough we can ensure that
                    |EA,N | ≤ pN (dimH (A)+δ) ,   |EB,N | ≤ q N (dimH (B)+δ) .
Let A′ be the homogeneous self-similar set with contraction p−N and translation set
EA,N , and define B ′ analogously. The open set condition holds for A′ , B ′ with open
set (0, 1). Then
                                      log |EA,N |
                        dimH (A′ ) =              < dimH (A) + δ,
                                        log pN
and likewise for B ′ . Also, by invariance of A, B under TpN , TqN respectively, A ⊂
A′ , B ⊂ B ′ . (Symbolically, EA,N corresponds to all initial words of length N in A,
and A′ to all concatenations of such words).
   Since δ > 0 was arbitrary, the theorem follows from Corollary 7.3 applied to A′ , B ′ .
                                                                                      
  Corollary 7.3 and Theorem 1.2 remain valid for C 1 maps g. It is not hard to deduce
this from the affine case and Furstenberg’s theory of CP-processes [21], but since it
would take us too far in a different direction, we defer a detailed proof of these and
related results to a forthcoming article.
  Recall from the introduction that another conjecture of Furstenberg, settled in [28],
concerns the dimension of the arithmetic sum of a ×p and a ×q invariant set. As a
corollary, we are able to sharpen this when the sum of the dimensions is at most 1:
Corollary 7.4. Let p, q be multiplicatively independent, and suppose that A, B ⊂ [0, 1) are
closed and Tp , Tq -invariant, respectively. Assume dimH (A) + dimH (B) ≤ 1. Then for any
subsets A′ ⊂ A, B ′ ⊂ B,
                             dimH (A′ + B ′ ) = dimH (A′ × B ′ )
  We note that in general dimH (A′ × B ′ ) ≥ dimH (A′ ) + dimH (B ′ ) and the inequality
can be strict, but there is an equality if either A′ or B ′ have equal Hausdorff and
upper box-counting dimensions.
Proof of Corollary 7.4. Suppose first that dimH (A) + dimH (B) < 1. By embedding A, B
in pN , q N -Cantor sets of almost the same dimension as in the proof of Theorem 1.2,
we may assume that A, B are already a p, q-Cantor set respectively. The proof is now
nearly identical to that of Corollary 6.3, using Theorem 7.2 in place of Theorem 6.2.
   If dimH (A) + dimH (B) = 1, then we proceed in the same way but now the sums of
the dimensions of the p, q-Cantor sets containing A, B is 1 + δ, where δ is arbitrarily
small. The argument of Corollary 6.3 still goes through with very minor modifica-
tions; details are left to the interested reader.                                    
  A minor variant of the same argument recovers the full conjecture of Furstenberg
on sums of Tp and Tq invariant sets. However, apart from some special cases, the
58                                          PABLO SHMERKIN

methods from this paper do not appear to yield a different proof of the correspond-
ing statement for convolutions of invariant measures, recall (1.1).
7.2. Convolutions of several self-similar measures. Theorem 7.2 generalizes easily
to convolutions of an arbitrary number of self-similar measures. This provides an
example of application of Theorem 1.11 in which X is a torus of arbitrary dimension.
Theorem 7.5. Let 0 < λ1 < . . . < λk < 1, k ≥ 2, be numbers such that (1/ log λj )kj=1 is
linearly independent over Q. Fix ∆1 , . . . , ∆k ∈ A, and write
                                    ηj = ηj (∆j , λj ) = ∗∞
                                                          n=0 Sλn
                                                                j
                                                                  ∆j
for the corresponding self-similar measures. Moreover, suppose that there is R > 0 such that
for infinitely many n it holds that
(7.4)                   |Pj (λj )| ≥ λRn
                                      k       for all Pj ∈ P∆j ,n , j = 1, . . . , k.
Then                                                                            !
                                                             k
                                                             X
                          D(η1 ∗ · · · ∗ ηk , q) = min              D(ηj , q), 1 .
                                                              j=1
for all q ∈ (1, ∞).
Proof. The proof is similar to that of Theorem 7.2, so we will skip some details. We
write aj = | log(λj )|. Let X = [0, a1 ) × · · · × [0, ak−1 ), and let T : X → X be given by
              T(x1 , . . . , xk−1 ) = (x1 + ak mod a1 , . . . , xk−1 + ak mod ak−1 ).
Up to re-parametrization, this is translation by (ak /a1 , . . . , ak /ak−1 ) on the (k − 1)-
torus, which is uniquely ergodic if (and only if) (1, ak /a1 , . . . , ak /ak−1 ) is linearly in-
dependent over Q; see e.g. [9, Corollary 4.15]. An easy calculation using the linear
independence of 1/ log λj shows that this is indeed the case.
   Given x ∈ X, we let J(x) = {j ∈ {1, . . . , k−1} : xj ∈ [0, ak )}, and define ∆ : X → A
as                                                      
                           ∆(x) = ∗j∈J(x) Sexp(xj ) ∆j ∗ ∆k .
We have already remarked that (X, T) is uniquely ergodic. The same argument from
Lemma 7.1 shows that the measures generated by this model are
           µx = Sexp(x1 −1(x1 ∈[0,ak ))a1 ) η1 ∗ · · · ∗ Sexp(xk−1 −1(x1 ∈[0,ak ))ak−1 ) ηk−1 ∗ ηk .
The model (X, T, ∆, λk ) is now readily checked to be pleasant, while the map ∆(·)
also meets the hypotheses in Theorem 1.11.
  To establish exponential separation, we notice that the difference between two
atoms of µx,n has the form
                                  Xk
                                      sj exj Pj (λj ),
                                             j=1
where sj ∈ {0, 1}, not all sj are zero, Pj ∈ P∆j ,n , and we set xk = 0. For n such that
(7.4) holds, the same argument in the proof of Theorem 7.2, together with Fubini and
          FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                59

an induction on the number of non-zero sj , shows that the distance between atoms
                       ′n
of µn,x is at least λR
                     k    for a.e. x, where R′ depends on R, the ∆i and k only.
  We have checked that Theorem 1.11 can be applied. A calculation like the one in
the proof of Theorem 7.2 yields
               Z                                            k−1
                                                            X   log λk
                       log k∆(x)kqq dP(x) = log k∆k kqq +                log k∆j kqq ,
                   X                                        j=1
                                                                log λj

so that Theorems 1.11 and 6.2 yield the desired conclusion.                              

7.3. Embeddings of self-similar sets. Let us denote by Aλ any self-similar set aris-
ing from a homogeneous IFS with contraction ratio λ, satisfying the open set condi-
tion and of dimension strictly smaller than 1. A special case of a conjecture of D-J.
Feng, W. Huang and H. Rao [17, Conjecture 1.2] asserts that Aλ cannot be affinely em-
bedded into Aλ′ unless log λ/ log λ′ ∈ Q. In [17] this is proved in some special cases,
and some further new cases were recently established by A. Algom [2]. However the
general case was not known even for central Cantor sets (i.e. self-similar sets gener-
ated by two maps). It follows immediately from Corollary 7.3 that if log λ/ log λ′ ∈
                                                                                   / Q,
then for every affine map h : R → R,

    dimH (Aλ ∩ h(Aλ′ )) ≤ dimH (Aλ ) + dimH (Aλ′ ) − 1 < min(dimH (Aλ ), dimH (Aλ′ )),

so that no affine immersion is possible. We can easily extend this to the case in which
the set we want to embed is an arbitrary non-trivial self-similar set:
                                    S               S
Corollary 7.6. Suppose A = i∈I λi A + ti , B = j∈J λ′ B + t′j are self-similar sets, with
A not a singleton, and B homogeneous, satisfying the open set condition, and of dimen-
sion strictly smaller than 1. If there is a C 1 map h : R → R such that h(A) ⊂ B, then
log λi / log λ′ is rational for all i.

Proof. Suppose that, on the contrary, log λi / log λ′ is irrational for some i, and yet
h(A) ⊂ B for some C 1 map h. Without loss of generality, assume that log λ1 / log λ′
is irrational. We may also assume that, writing fj (x) = λj x + tj , the fixed points
of f1 and f2 are different (if all the fj had the same fixed point, then A would
equal this point). If N is sufficiently large, then (f2 f1N , f1N f2 ) is a homogeneous
IFS satisfying the open set condition, and its attractor AN is contained in A, so that
h(AN ) ⊂ A. On the other hand, if log(λ2 λN             ′
                                              1 )/ log(λ ) is rational then, by our assump-
tion, log(λ2 λN
              1
                +1
                   )/ log(λ′ ) is irrational.
   We have thus reduced the problem to the case of A homogeneous and satisfying
the open set condition. Under these assumptions, [17, Theorem 1.1] implies that
there is an affine embedding of A into B. But, as we have seen, this is ruled out by
Corollary 7.3.                                                                           
60                                    PABLO SHMERKIN

           8. S ECTIONS AND PROJECTIONS OF PLANAR SELF - SIMILAR SETS
   Our next geometric application involves homogeneous self-similar sets and mea-
sures on the plane. It was observed in several previous works, going back at least
to [38], that methods devised to study geometric properties of cartesian products of
linear self-similar sets and measures often can also be applied to the study of self-
similar sets and measures on the plane. The next lemma may help clarify the reason
behind this; compare with Lemma 7.1.
Lemma 8.1. Fix α ∈ [0, 2π), λ ∈ (0, 1) and a finitely supported probability measure e
P                                                                                   ∆=
                    2
  i∈I pi δ(ti ) on R . Denote rotation by α by Rα , and let
                                                  n e
                                    µ = ∗∞
                                         n=0 Sλn Rα (∆)

be the associated homogeneous self-similar measure. Given x ∈ S 1 , let Px (y) = hx, yi be the
orthogonal projection onto a line in direction x. Furthermore, let ∆(x) = Px e∆.
                                                       1
   Then the measures µx generated by the model (S , R−α , ∆, λ) are the projections Px µ.
Moreover, the model is pleasant if and only if α/π ∈/ Q.
Proof. Immediate, since
                            hx, Sλn Rnα (y)i = Rn−α x, Sλn (y) ,
and rotation by β ∈ [0, 2π) is uniquely ergodic if and only if β/π is irrational.           
Theorem 8.2. Let µ and Px be as in Lemma 8.1. Assume further that α/π ∈  / Q, and that
                                                   1
the open set condition holds. Then for every x ∈ S and every q ∈ (1, ∞),
                                                               !
                                                      e qq
                                                 log k∆k
                           D(Px µ, q) = min                  ,1 .
                                               (q − 1) log λ
                   n−1
Proof. Let µn = ∗i=0            e By the open set condition, µn has |I|n atoms, which
                       Sλn Rnα (∆).
       n
are cλ -separated for some c > 0. Note that Px (µn ) = µx,n (the measures generated
by the model from Lemma 8.1). In particular, the atoms of µx,n are the projections of
the atoms of µn .
   Let R be a large enough integer to be chosen later. By elementary geometry, for a
given pair a, b of distinct atoms of µn , the set of x ∈ S 1 such that |Px a − Px b| ≤ λRn
has measure Oc (λ(R−1)n ). Hence, the set of x ∈ S 1 such that the atoms of µn,x are all
distinct and λRn -separated has measure 1 − Oc (|I|2n )λ(R−1)n . This implies that if R is
taken large enough in terms of |I|, then for almost all x ∈ S 1 there is n0 = n0 (x) such
that the atoms of µn,x are distinct and λRn separated for all n ≥ n0 . Hence the model
from Lemma 8.1 has exponential separation.
   Since the hypothesis on ∆ is trivially satisfied, we can apply Theorem 1.11 to con-
clude that                                  R                   !
                                                       e q dx
                                               log kPx ∆k q
                         D(Px µ, q) = min                     ,1 ,
                                               (q − 1) log λ
           FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                     61

                                               e for all but a finite set of x.
which gives the claim since Px is injective on ∆                                              

  We obtain the following corollary on linear sections of planar self-similar sets;
compare with Corollary 7.3.

Corollary 8.3. Fix λ ∈ (0, 1), α ∈ [0, 2π) such that α/π is irrational, and a finite set (ti )i∈I
of translations in R2 . Assume that the IFS {λRα (x) + ti }i∈I satisfies the open set condition,
and denote its invariant set by E.
   Then
                           dimB (E ∩ ℓ) ≤ max(dimH (E) − 1, 0).
for all lines ℓ ⊂ R2 .

Proof. Immediate from Lemmas 1.7 and 1.8 applied to Px , and Theorem 8.2 applied
to the uniform self-similar measure on E.                                      

  We make some remarks about this corollary.
    a) Let E be any Borel set with dimH (E) ≥ 1. It follows from Marstrand’s inter-
       section theorem (see e.g. [34, Theorem 10.10]) that, given a direction x ∈ S 1 ,
       almost all lines ℓ in direction x satisfy dimH (E ∩ ℓ) ≤ dimH (E) − 1. There has
       been great interest in improving almost all-type of results for classes of nat-
       ural sets, but most of the progress achieved concerns projections rather than
       the more subtle problem of intersections. For some classes of random stochas-
       tically self-similar sets, even stronger bounds on intersections were obtained
       in [47, Section 11]. D-J. Feng has some unpublished results for deterministic
       sets, using ad-hoc constructions. To the best of our knowledge, Corollary 8.3
       is the first result of this kind for a natural class of deterministic sets.
    b) It is also natural to consider the dual question of obtaining lower bounds on
       the dimension of E ∩ ℓ for lines ℓ ⊂ R2 when dimH (E) > 1. Of course, many
       such intersections are empty, but one would like to know that the intersec-
       tions are large (of dimension equal or close to dimH (E) − 1) for many lines ℓ in
       a given direction (measured, for example, in terms of Hausdorff dimension).
       Progress on this problem was achieved recently by K. Falconer and X. Jin [13].
    c) Using Furstenberg’s theory of CP-processes and galleries [21], it is possible
       to obtain a version of Corollary 8.3 where lines are replaced by C 1 or even
       differentiable curves; we hope to address this at detail in a forthcoming paper.
       On the other hand, no such result can hold for Lipschitz curves since any set
       of upper box-counting dimension less than 1 can be embedded in a Lipschitz
       curve.
    d) The hypothesis that α/π is irrational is necessary: if C is the middle-thirds
       Cantor set, then the diagonal of C × C is an affine copy of C. However, the
       homogeneity assumption is likely an artifact of the proof.
62                                      PABLO SHMERKIN

                       9. A BSOLUTE CONTINUITY AND Lq DENSITIES
   We turn to the problem of absolute continuity, and smoothness of the densities, of
self-similar and related measures. Compared to Sections 6–8, our results here will
be less explicit: we show that in many parametrized families, the measures have a
density in Lq for all parameters outside of some very small set. In particular, we will
establish Theorem 1.3. Unfortunately, however, either for Bernoulli convolutions or
the other parametrized families we consider, we do not know how to find even one
explicit parameter which is not exceptional.
   The main ideas in this section are borrowed from [43, 46]; the reason we improve
upon existing results is that Theorem 1.11 provides stronger information about Lq
dimensions to begin with.
   Recall that the Fourier transform of a Borel probability measure µ on R is defined
as                                   Z
                              b(ξ) = exp(2πixξ) dµ(x).
                              µ
Given a model (X, T, ∆, λ) and k ∈ N, let us consider the measures
                                                    ki
                                   µ(k)  ∞
                                    x = ∗i=0 Sλk ∆(T (x)).

These are precisely the measures generated by the model (X, Tk , ∆, λk ), which is
pleasant whenever the original model is; however we will not need to use this.
  The next theorem presents our general result on densities of µx . We will deduce
several applications afterwards.
Theorem 9.1. Let (X, T, ∆, λ) be a model satisfying the assumptions of Theorem 1.11, and
assume furthermore that X is either a singleton or infinite. Fix q ∈ (1, +∞) and assume
also that                       R
                                 X
                                    log k∆(x)kqq dP(x)
                                                       > 1.
                                      (q − 1) log λ
Suppose y ∈ X is such that for infinitely many k ∈ N there exist constants C(k), δ(k) > 0
                                     (k)
such that the Fourier transform of µy satisfies
                             d(k)
                             µy (ξ) ≤ C(k) |ξ|−δ(k)     for all ξ 6= 0.

     Then µy is absolutely continuous and has a density in Lq .
Proof. Using the convolution structure of µy , we decompose
                                                  
                   µy = ∗k∤i ∆(Ti y) ∗ ∗k|i ∆(Ti y) =: νy(k) ∗ µ(k)
                                                                y .

If we can show that
(9.1)                                    D(νy(k) , q) = 1
for all large enough k, then [46, Theorem 4.4], together with our assumption on the
                 (k)
Fourier decay µy , will allow us to conclude that µy has a density in Lq .
         FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                63

  For fixed k, consider the model (X ′ , T′ , ∆′ , λ), where X ′ = X × [k], T′ (x, j) =
(Tx, j + 1 mod k) and
                                     
                            ′            ∆(x) if j 6= 0
                          ∆ (x, j) =                        .
                                         δ0        if j = 0
                                                              (k)
The measures µ′x generated by this model are precisely νx , as is immediate from
the definition of ∆′ . This model satisfies all the assumptions in Theorem 1.11. In-
deed, exponential separation is inherited from the base model, since the atoms of
µ′x,n are a subset of the atoms of µx,n . Unique ergodicity (with invariant measure
             P
P′ = P × ( k1 j δj )) follows from the unique ergodicity of (X, T) (note that there may
be no periodic points, for otherwise the uniform measure on the orbit would be T-
invariant, contradicting unique ergodicity). The rest of the assumptions in Theorem
1.11 are immediate.
   Applying Theorem 1.11 and recalling the form of P′ , we conclude that for any
y ∈ X,
                                          R                          !
                                      k−1                 q
                                       k   X
                                              log k∆(x)k  q dP(x)
                  D(νy(k) , q) = min                              , 1 = 1,
                                             (q − 1) log λ
provided k is large enough. This establishes (9.1) and concludes the proof.             

  We remark that the theorem provides the correct range for the possibility of having
an Lq density (other than perhaps the endpoint), since measures
                                                           R       µ with anRLq density
satisfy D(µ, q) = 1; this can be seen from the inequality ( I f )q ≤ |I|q−1 I f q for all
intervals I, where f is the Lq density of µ.
  As a first application, we can now conclude the proof of Theorem 1.3.

Proof of Theorem 1.3. Erdős [11] and Kahane [30] proved that there is a set E ′ ⊂ (0, 1)
of zero Hausdorff dimension, such that if λ ∈ (0, 1) \ E ′ , then |νbλ (ξ)| ≤ C(λ)|ξ|−δ(λ)
for some C(λ), δ(λ) > 0. See also [37] for an exposition of the argument.
   Let E1 = {λ ∈ (0, 1/2) : λk ∈ E ′ for some k}, which still has zero Hausdorff di-
mension. Consider the model Xλ with trivial dynamics as in the proof of Theorem
6.2, and recall from Definition 1.4 and the discussion afterwards that there is another
zero-dimensional set E2 such that Xλ has exponential separation for λ ∈ (1/2, 1) \ E2 .
                 (k)
The measure µx for the model Xλ is just νλk . Part (i) of the theorem then follows
from Theorem 9.1 with exceptional set E = E1 ∪ E2 .
   The second part follows from the first, the identity νλ = νλ2 ∗ Sλ νλ2 , and the fact
that the convolution of two L2 functions is continuous.                                 

   The method of Erdős-Kahane has been applied to many other parametrized fam-
ilies of fractal measures, see [46, Section 3] for some examples. Using this, one can
extend Theorem 1.3 to more general families of self-similar measures. We state one
such result.
64                                     PABLO SHMERKIN

Theorem 9.2. Let u 7→ (λ(u), t1(u), . . . , tm (u)) be a real-analytic map from an open domain
U ⊂ Rℓ to ((−1, 0) ∪ (0, 1))×Rm . Assume that for all ω 6= ω ′ ∈ {1, . . . , m}N there is u ∈ U
such that
                            X∞                    X∞
(9.2)                          tωi (u)λ(u) 6= i
                                                       tωi′ (u)λ(u)i .
                              i=0                i=0
                                                              P
Given a probability vector p = (p1 , . . . , pm ), write ∆pu = mj=1 pj δ(tj (u)), and denote the
                                     p         ∞          p
associated self-similar measure by νu = ∗i=0 Sλ(u)i ∆u . Then there exists a set E ⊂ U of
Hausdorff dimension at most ℓ − 1 such that if u ∈ U \ E and k∆pu kqq < |λu |q−1, then νup is
absolutely continuous with a density in Lq .
Proof. The proof is essentially identical to that of [46, Theorem A]. Let Xup be the
model with trivial dynamics associated to νup . It follows from [27, Theorem 1.7] and
the non-degeneracy assumption (9.2) that there is a set E ′ ⊂ U of Hausdorff (and
even packing) dimension ≤ ℓ − 1 such that Xup has exponential separation for all
u ∈ U \ E1 and all p.
   On the other hand, for each k there is a set Ek′′ of zero Hausdorff dimension such
                                   p
that the measure ∗∞                                                    / U \ Ek′′ and all p.
                      i=0 Sλ(u)ki ∆u has power Fourier decay for all u ∈
The proof of this fact is contained in the proof of [46, Theorem A]; in short, one uses
two variants of the Erdős-Kahane argument depending on whether or not the func-
tion u 7→ λ(u) is constant. In light of Theorem 9.1, the claim follows with exceptional
set E ′ ∪ (∪∞    ′′
            k=1 Ek ).                                                                     
   Note, however, that just as in [46] here we are limited to homogeneous iterated
function systems, as the argument to pass from full Lq dimension to Lq density de-
pends strongly on the structure of the measures as infinite Bernoulli convolutions.
In [42] absolute continuity was obtained for a.e. parameter for some families of
non-homogeneous self-similar measures, but no information on the densities was
obtained.
   As another application of Theorem 9.1, we obtain the following result on projec-
tions of planar self-similar measures:
Corollary 9.3. Let µ be as in Lemma 8.1. Assume that the open set condition holds. Then
                                                                                   e such
there is a set E ⊂ [0, 2π) of zero Hausdorff dimension (depending only λ, α, supp(∆)),
                                                                           e q < λ(q−1) .
that Px µ is absolutely continuous with an Lq density for all q such that k∆k q

Proof. If α/π ∈ Q, then we can assume that α = 0 by iterating the original IFS. In this
case (Px µ)x∈S 1 is a family of self-similar measures satisfying the assumptions of [46,
Theorem A], so the claim holds as explained in the above discussion.
  If α/π ∈ / Q, consider the model (S 1 , R−α , ∆, λ) from Lemma 8.1. The measures
 (k)                                                          n e
µx are projections of the self-similar measure ∗∞    n=0 Sλn Rkα ∆. It follows from [46,
Proposition 3.3] that there exists a set Ek ⊂ [0, 2π) of zero Hausdorff dimension,
depending only on λ, α, k and supp(∆),    e such that the projection µ(k)x has a power
           FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                            65

Fourier decay for all x ∈ [0, 2π) \ Ek . The claim then follows from Theorem 9.1 with
exceptional set E = ∪k∈N Ek .                                                      
  Recall that the Fourier transform of a measure µ on R2 is
                                   Z
                            µb(ξ) = exp(2πihy, ξi) dµ(y),

and that if v ∈ S 1 , then Pd         b(ξv). In particular, if µ has power Fourier decay
                             v µ(ξ) = µ
                    µ(ξ)| = O(|ξ|−δ ) for ξ ∈ R2 \ {0} and some δ > 0), then so do all its
(in the sense that |b
projections Pv µ.
   If the planar self-similar measure µ has power Fourier decay and α/π is irrational,
then the proof of the Corollary 9.3 together with the above observations show that
Px µ has an Lq density for all x ∈ S 1 , whenever k∆k    e q < λ(q−1) . Although we know
                                                            q
of no explicit example of such measure µ, in parameter space power Fourier decay
occurs outside of very small exceptional sets; see [45, Theorem D].
   We obtain a further corollary for convolutions of two self-similar measures, with
the parameter coming in the scaling. A direct application of Theorem 9.1 is some-
                                                               (k)
what awkward because the corresponding measures µk do not have a particularly
nice structure. However, the proof of [46, Theorem D], using Theorem 7.2 to calcu-
late the Lq dimensions of self-similar measures and their convolutions, yields our
final result; the verification of the details is left to the reader.
Corollary 9.4. Let
                                  ηj = ηj (∆j , λj ) = ∗∞
                                                        n=0 Sλn
                                                              j
                                                                ∆j
be two homogeneous self-similar measures satisfying the open set condition on the real line.
   Then there is a set E ⊂ R of zero Hausdorff dimension, such that if t ∈ R \ E and q > 1 is
such that D(η1 , q) + D(η2 , q) > 1, then the convolution η1 ∗ St η2 is absolutely continuous
with a density in Lq .

                                            R EFERENCES
 [1] Christoph Aistleitner, Gerhard Larcher, and Mark Lewko. Additive energy and the Hausdorff
     dimension of the exceptional set in metric pair correlation problems. Israel J. Math., 222(1):463–
     485, 2017. With an appendix by Jean Bourgain. 19
 [2] Amir Algom. Affine embeddings of Cantor sets on the line. J. Fractal Geom., 5(4):339–350, 2018.
     59
 [3] Balázs Bárány, Andrew Ferguson, and Károly Simon. Slicing the Sierpiński gasket. Nonlinearity,
     25(6):1753–1770, 2012. 50
 [4] Balázs Bárány and Michał Rams. Dimension of slices of Sierpiński-like carpets. J. Fractal Geom.,
     1(3):273–294, 2014. 50
 [5] Jean Bourgain. The discretized sum-product and projection theorems. J. Anal. Math., 112:193–236,
     2010. 21, 23, 25
 [6] Jean Bourgain and Alex Gamburd. Uniform expansion bounds for Cayley graphs of SL2 (Fp ).
     Ann. of Math. (2), 167(2):625–642, 2008. 19, 23
 [7] Emmanuel Breuillard and Péter Varjú. Entropy of Bernoulli convolutions and uniform exponen-
     tial growth for linear groups. Preprint, arXiv:1510.04043, 2015. 7
66                                         PABLO SHMERKIN

 [8] Semyon Dyatlov and Joshua Zahl. Spectral gaps, additive energy, and a fractal uncertainty prin-
     ciple. Geom. Funct. Anal., 26(4):1011–1094, 2016. 19
 [9] Manfred Einsiedler and Thomas Ward. Ergodic theory with a view towards number theory, volume
     259 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag London, Ltd., London, 2011. 11, 58
[10] Paul Erdős. On a family of symmetric Bernoulli convolutions. Amer. J. Math., 61:974–976, 1939. 5
[11] Paul Erdős. On the smoothness properties of a family of Bernoulli convolutions. Amer. J. Math.,
     62:180–186, 1940. 5, 63
[12] Kenneth Falconer. Techniques in fractal geometry. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1997. 45, 49
[13] Kenneth Falconer and Xiong Jin. Dimension conservation for self-similar sets and fractal perco-
     lation. Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN, (24):13260–13289, 2015. 61
[14] Ai-Hua Fan, Ka-Sing Lau, and Hui Rao. Relationships between different dimensions of a mea-
     sure. Monatsh. Math., 135(3):191–201, 2002. 8
[15] De-Jun Feng. Gibbs properties of self-conformal measures and the multifractal formalism. Er-
     godic Theory Dynam. Systems, 27(3):787–812, 2007. 48
[16] De-Jun Feng and Huyi Hu. Dimension theory of iterated function systems. Comm. Pure Appl.
     Math., 62(11):1435–1500, 2009. 7
[17] De-Jun Feng, Wen Huang, and Hui Rao. Affine embeddings and intersections of Cantor sets. J.
     Math. Pures Appl. (9), 102(6):1062–1079, 2014. 4, 59
[18] Alex Furman. On the multiplicative ergodic theorem for uniquely ergodic systems. Ann. Inst. H.
     Poincaré Probab. Statist., 33(6):797–815, 1997. 33, 34
[19] Harry Furstenberg. Disjointness in ergodic theory, minimal sets, and a problem in Diophantine
     approximation. Math. Systems Theory, 1:1–49, 1967. 2
[20] Harry Furstenberg. Intersections of Cantor sets and transversality of semigroups. In Problems in
     analysis (Sympos. Salomon Bochner, Princeton Univ., Princeton, N.J., 1969), pages 41–59. Princeton
     Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J., 1970. 3, 4, 10
[21] Hillel Furstenberg. Ergodic fractal measures and dimension conservation. Ergodic Theory Dynam.
     Systems, 28(2):405–422, 2008. 57, 61
[22] Daniel Galicer, Santiago Saglietti, Pablo Shmerkin, and Alexia Yavicoli. Lq dimensions and pro-
     jections of random measures. Nonlinearity, 29(9):2609–2640, 2016. 34, 56
[23] John Hawkes. Some algebraic properties of small sets. Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser. (2), 26(102):195–
     201, 1975. 49
[24] Michael Hochman. Geometric rigidity of ×m invariant measures. J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS),
     14(5):1539–1563, 2012. 49
[25] Michael Hochman. Lectures on dynamics, fractal geometry, and metric number theory. J. Mod.
     Dyn., 8(3-4):437–497, 2014. 4
[26] Michael Hochman. On self-similar sets with overlaps and inverse theorems for entropy. Ann. of
     Math. (2), 180(2):773–822, 2014. 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 18, 21, 38, 39, 42, 47, 48, 50
[27] Michael Hochman. On self-similar sets with overlaps and inverse theorems for entropy in Rd .
     Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 2017. 47, 64
[28] Michael Hochman and Pablo Shmerkin. Local entropy averages and projections of fractal mea-
     sures. Ann. of Math. (2), 175(3):1001–1059, 2012. 3, 57
[29] Thomas Jordan, Pablo Shmerkin, and Boris Solomyak. Multifractal structure of Bernoulli convo-
     lutions. Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 151(3):521–539, 2011. 7
[30] Jean-Pierre Kahane. Sur la distribution de certaines séries aléatoires. In Colloque de Théorie des
     Nombres (Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, 1969), pages 119–122. Bull. Soc. Math. France, Mém. No. 25,
     Soc. Math. France Paris, 1971. 5, 63
[31] Yitzhak Katznelson and Benjamin Weiss. A simple proof of some ergodic theorems. Israel J. Math.,
     42(4):291–296, 1982. 34
           FURSTENBERG’S INTERSECTION CONJECTURE AND SELF-SIMILAR MEASURES                              67

[32] Richard Kenyon and Yuval Peres. Intersecting random translates of invariant Cantor sets. Invent.
     Math., 104(3):601–629, 1991. 49
[33] Ka-Sing Lau and Sze-Man Ngai. Multifractal measures and a weak separation condition. Adv.
     Math., 141(1):45–96, 1999. 32, 35, 46
[34] Pertti Mattila. Geometry of sets and measures in Euclidean spaces, volume 44 of Cambridge Studies in
     Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995. Fractals and rectifiability.
     4, 49, 61
[35] Fedor Nazarov, Yuval Peres, and Pablo Shmerkin. Convolutions of Cantor measures without
     resonance. Israel J. Math., 187:93–116, 2012. 10, 12, 13, 32, 34, 37, 56
[36] Yuval Peres and Wilhelm Schlag. Smoothness of projections, Bernoulli convolutions, and the
     dimension of exceptions. Duke Math. J., 102(2):193–251, 2000. 6
[37] Yuval Peres, Wilhelm Schlag, and Boris Solomyak. Sixty years of Bernoulli convolutions. In Frac-
     tal geometry and stochastics, II (Greifswald/Koserow, 1998), volume 46 of Progr. Probab., pages 39–65.
     Birkhäuser, Basel, 2000. 63
[38] Yuval Peres and Pablo Shmerkin. Resonance between Cantor sets. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems,
     29(1):201–221, 2009. 3, 60
[39] Yuval Peres and Boris Solomyak. Absolute continuity of Bernoulli convolutions, a simple proof.
     Math. Res. Lett., 3(2):231–239, 1996. 5
[40] Yuval Peres and Boris Solomyak. Existence of Lq dimensions and entropy dimension for self-
     conformal measures. Indiana Univ. Math. J., 49(4):1603–1621, 2000. 37, 46
[41] Giorgis Petridis. Plünnecke’s inequality. Combin. Probab. Comput., 20(6):921–938, 2011. 22
[42] Pablo Shmerkin Santiago Saglietti and Boris Solomyak. Absolute continuity of non-
     homogeneous self-similar measures. Preprint, arXiv:1709.05092, 2017. 64
[43] Pablo Shmerkin. On the exceptional set for absolute continuity of Bernoulli convolutions. Geom.
     Funct. Anal., 24(3):946–958, 2014. 6, 62
[44] Pablo Shmerkin. Projections of self-similar and related fractals: a survey of recent developments.
     In Christoph Bandt, Kenneth J. Falconer, and Martina Zähle, editors, Fractal Geometry and Stochas-
     tics V, pages 53–74. Springer, 2015. 49
[45] Pablo Shmerkin and Boris Solomyak. Absolute continuity of complex Bernoulli convolutions.
     Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., FirstView, 2016. 65
[46] Pablo Shmerkin and Boris Solomyak. Absolute continuity of self-similar measures, their projec-
     tions and convolutions. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 368(7):5125–5151, 2016. 6, 62, 63, 64, 65
[47] Pablo Shmerkin and Ville Suomala. Spatially independent martingales, intersections and appli-
     cations. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 251(1195):102pp,
                                                P         2018. 61
[48] Boris Solomyak. On the random series ±λn (an Erdős problem). Ann. of Math. (2), 142(3):611–
     625, 1995. 5
[49] Terence Tao and Van H. Vu. Additive combinatorics, volume 105 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced
     Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010. Paperback edition [of MR2289012].
     21, 22
[50] Péter Varjú. Absolute continuity of Bernoulli convolutions for algebraic parameters. Preprint,
     arXiv:1602.00261, 2016. 7
[51] Thomas Wolff. Recent work connected with the Kakeya problem. In Prospects in mathematics
     (Princeton, NJ, 1996), pages 129–162. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1999. 4
[52] Meng Wu. A proof of Furstenberg’s conjecture on the intersections of ×p and ×q-invariant sets.
     Preprint, 2016. 15
68                                  PABLO SHMERKIN

  D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS AND S TATISTICS , T ORCUATO D I T ELLA U NIVERSITY, AND CON-
ICET, B UENOS A IRES , A RGENTINA
  E-mail address: pshmerkin@utdt.edu
  URL: http://www.utdt.edu/profesores/pshmerkin
